25. Then the precious Mountain-râga, Sume(ru), firmly holding this great earth when Bodhisattva
appeared in the world, was swayed by the wind of his perfected merit.

26. On every hand the world was greatly shaken, as the wind drives the tossing boat; so also
the minutest atoms of sandal perfume, and the hidden sweetness of precious lilies,

27. Floated on the air and rose through space and then commingling came back to earth; so again
the garments of Devas descending from heaven touching the body, caused delightful thrills
of joy;

28. The sun and moon with constant course redoubled the brilliancy of their light, whilst in
the world the fire’s gleam of itself prevailed without the use of fuel.

29. Pure water, cool and refreshing from the springs, flowed here-and there, self-caused; in
the palace all the waiting women were filled with joy at such an unprecedented event.

30. Proceeding all in company, they drink and bathe themselves; in all arose calm and delightful
thoughts; countless inferior Devas (bhûtas), delighting in religion, like clouds assembled.31.
In the garden of Lumbinî, filling the spaces between the trees,

rare and special flowers, in great abundance, bloomed out of season.32. All cruel and malevolent
kinds of beings, together conceived a loving heart;all diseases and afflictions among
men without a cure applied, of themselves were healed.

33. The various cries and confused sounds of beasts were hushed and silence reigned; the stagnant
water of the river-courses flowed apace, whilst the polluted streams became clear and
pure.34. No clouds gathered throughout the heavens, whilst angelic music, self-caused, was
heard around; the whole world of sentient creatures enjoyed peace and universal tranquillity.

35. Just as when a country visited by desolation, suddenly obtains .an enlightened ruler, so
when Bodhisattva was born, he came to remove the sorrows of all living things.

36. Mâra, the heavenly monarch, alone was grieved and rejoiced not. The Royal Father (Suddhodana)
beholding his son, strange and miraculous, as to his birth,37. Though self-possessed
and assured in his soul, was yet moved with astonishment and his countenance changed,

whilst he alternately weighed with himself the meaning (of such an event), now rejoiced and
now distressed.38. The queen-mother beholding her child, born thus contrary to laws of nature,
her timorous woman’s heart was doubtful; her mind through fear, swayed between extremes:

39. Not distinguishing the happy from the sad portents, again and again she gave way to grief;
and now the aged women of the world, (of the ’long night’) in a confused way supplicating
heavenly guidance,

40. Implored the gods to whom their rites were paid, to bless the child; (cause peace to rest
upon the royal child.) Now there was at this time in the grove, a certain soothsayer, a
Brahman,41. Of dignified mien and wide-spread renown, famed for his skill and scholarship:
beholding the signs, his heart rejoiced, and he exulted at the miraculous event.42. Knowing
the king’s mind to be somewhat perplexed, he addressed him (thus) with truth and earnestness,
’Men born in the world, chiefly desire to have a son the most renowned;

43. ’But now the king, like the moon when full, should feel in himself a perfect joy, having
begotten an unequalled son, (for by this the king) will become illustrious among his race;

44. ’Let then his heart be joyful and glad, banish all anxiety and doubt, the spiritual omens
that are everywhere, manifested indicate for your house and dominion a course of continued
prosperity.

45. ’The most excellently endowed child now born will bring deliverance to the entire world,
none but a heavenly teacher has a body such as this, golden colour’d, gloriously resplendent.46.
’One endowed with such transcendent marks, must reach the state of "Samyak-Sambodhi,"

or if he be induced to engage in worldly delights, then he must become a universal monarch.47.
’Everywhere recognised as the ruler of the great earth, mighty in his righteous government,
as a monarch ruling the four empires, uniting under his sway all other rulers;

48. ’As among all lesser lights, the sun’s brightness is by far the most excellent. But if he
seek a dwelling among the mountain forests, with single heart searching for deliverance,

49. ’Having arrived at the perfection of true wisdom, he will become illustrious throughout
the world; for as mount Sumeru is monarch among all mountains,

50. ’Or, as gold is chief among all precious things, or, as the ocean is supreme among all streams,
or, as the moon is first among the stars, or, as the sun is brightest of all luminaries,51.
’So Tathâgata, born in the world, is the most eminent of men; his eyes clear and
expanding, the lashes both above and below moving with the lid,52. ’The iris of the eye of
a clear blue colour. in shape like the moon when half full,

such characteristics as these, without contradiction, foreshadow the most excellent condition
of perfect (wisdom).’53. At this time the king addressed the twice-born, ’If it be as you
say, with respect to these miraculous signs, that they indicate such consequences,54. ’Then
no such case has happened with former kings, nor down to our time has such a thing occurred.’
The Brahman addressed the king thus,

’Say not so; for it is not right;55. ’For with regard to renown and wisdom, personal celebrity,
and worldly substance, these four things indeed are not to be considered according to
precedent or subsequence;56. ’But whatever is produced according to nature, such things are
liable to the law of cause and effect: but now whilst I recount some parallels let the king
attentively listen;

