113. Thus having appeased every anxious heart among the king’s household, (the Rishi) by his
own inherent spiritual power ascended into space and disappeared.

114. At this time Suddhodana râga, seeing the excellent marks (predictive signs) of his son,
and, moreover, hearing the words of Asita, certifying that which would surely happen,115.
Was greatly affected with reverence to the child, he redoubled measures for its protection,and
(was filled) with constant thought; (moreover) he issued decrees through the empire,
to liberate all captives in prison.116. According to the custom when a (royal) son was born,
giving the usual largess, in agreement with the directions of the Sacred Books, and extending
his gifts to all; (or, all these things he did completely).

117. The child when ten days old, (his father’s) mind being now quite tranquil, he announced
a sacrifice to all the gods, and prepared to give liberal offerings to all the religious
bodies;

118. Srâmanas and Brâhmanas invoked by their prayers a blessing from the gods, whilst he bestowed
gifts on the royal kinspeople and the ministers and the poor within the country;119.
The women who dwelt in the city or the villages, (all those who needed) cattle or horses
or elephants or money, each, according to his necessities, was liberally supplied;

120. Then selecting by divination a lucky time, they took the child back to his own palace;
with a double-feeding white-pure-tooth, carried in a richly-adorned chariot (cradle),121.
With ornaments of every kind and colour round his neck; shining with beauty, exceedingly resplendent
with unguents.

The queen embracing him in her arms, going around, worshipped the heavenly spirits.122. Afterwards
she remounted her precious chariot, surrounded by her waiting women;

the king, with his ministers and people, and all the crowd of attendants, leading the way and
following,123. Even as the ruler of heaven, Sakra, is surrounded by crowds of Devas;

as Mahesvara, when suddenly his six-faced child was born,124. Arranging every kind of present,
gave gifts, and asked for blessings; so now the king, when his royal son was born, made
all his arrangements in like manner;

125. So Vaisravana, the heavenly king, when Nalakûvara was born, surrounded by a concourse of
Devas, was filled with joy and much gladness;126. So the king, now the royal prince was
born, in the kingdom of Kapila, his people and all his subjects were likewise filled with
joy.

VARGA 2. LIVING IN THE PALACE.

