1. (There was) a descendant of the Ikshvâku (family), an invincible Sâkya monarch, pure in mind
(mental gifts) and of unspotted virtue, called therefore ’Pure-rice’ (Suddhodana).

2. Joyously reverenced by all men (or, ’beings’), as the new moon (is welcomed by the world),
the king indeed (was) like the heaven-ruler Sakra, his queen like (the divine) Sakî.

3. Strong and calm of purpose as the earth, pure in mind as the water-lily, her name, figuratively
assumed, Mâyâ, she was in truth incapable of class-comparison.

4. On her in likeness as the heavenly queen descended the spirit and entered her womb. A mother,
but free from grief or pain, (she was) without any false or illusory mind.

5. Disliking the clamorous ways of the world, (she remembered) the excellent garden of Lumbinî,
a pleasant spot, a quiet forest retreat, (with its) trickling fountains, and blooming
flowers and fruits.

6. Quiet and peaceful, delighting in meditation, respectfully she asked the king for liberty
to roam therein; the king, understanding her earnest desire, was seized with a seldom-felt
anxiety (to grant her request).

7. He commanded his kinsfolk, within and without (the palace), to repair with her to that garden
shade; and now the queen Mâyâ knew that her time for child-bearing was come.8. She rested
calmly on a beautiful couch, (surrounded by) a hundred thousand female attendants;

(it was) the eighth day of the fourth moon, a season of serene and agreeable character.9. Whilst
she (thus) religiously observed the rules of a pure discipline, Bodhisattva was born
from her right side, (come) to deliver the world, constrained by great pity, without causing
his mother pain or anguish.

10. As king Yu-liu was born from the thigh, as king Pi-t’au was born from the hand, as king
Man-to was born from the top of the head, as king Kia-k’ha was born from the arm-pit,11. So
also was Bodhisattva on the day of his birth produced from the right side; gradually emerging
from the womb, he shed in every direction the rays of his glory.

12. As one (born) from recumbent space, and not through the gates of life, through countless
kalpas, practising virtue, self-conscious he came forth to life, without confusion.

13. Calm and collected, not falling headlong (was he born), gloriously manifested, perfectly
adorned, sparkling with light he came from the womb, as when the sun first rises (from the
East).14. (Men) indeed regarded his exceeding great glory, yet their sight remained uninjured:
he allowed them to gaze, the brightness of his person concealed for the time, as when
we look upon the moon in the heavens.

15. His body, nevertheless, was effulgent with light, and like the sun which eclipses the shining
of the lamp, so the true gold-like beauty of Bodhisattva shone forth and was diffused
everywhere.

16. Upright and firm and unconfused in mind, he deliberately took seven steps, the soles of
his feet resting evenly upon the ground as he went, his footmarks remained bright as seven
stars.

17. Moving like the lion, king of beasts, and looking earnestly towards; the four quarters,
penetrating to the centre the principles of truth, he spake thus with the fullest assurance:18.
’This birth is in the condition of a Buddha; after this I have done with renewed birth;
now only am I born this once, for the purpose of saving all the world.’

19. And now from the midst of heaven there descended two streams of pure water, one warm, the
other cold, and baptized his head, causing refreshment to his body.

20. And now he is placed in the precious palace hall, a jewelled couch for him to sleep upon,
and the heavenly kings with their golden flowery hands hold fast the four feet of the bed.

21. Meanwhile the Devas in space, seizing their jewelled canopies, attending, raise in responsive
harmony their heavenly songs, to encourage him to accomplish his perfect purpose.

22. Then the Nâga-râgas filled with joy, earnestly desiring to show their reverence for the
most excellent law, as they had paid honour to the former Buddhas, now went to meet Bodhisattva;23.
They scattered before him Mandâra flowers, rejoicing with heartfelt joy to pay such
religious homage; (and so, again,) Tathâgata having appeared in the world, the Suddha
angels rejoiced with gladness;

24. With no selfish or partial joy, but for the sake of religion they rejoiced, because creation,
engulfed in the ocean of pain, was now to obtain perfect release.

