85. The king beholding the tears of the Rishi, thinking of his son, his soul was overcome, and
his breath fast held his swelling heart. Thus alarmed and ill at ease,

86. Unconsciously he arose from his seat, and, bowing his head at the Rishi’s feet he addressed
him in these words, ’This son of mine, born thus wonderfully,

87. ’Beautiful in face, and surpassingly graceful, little different from the gods in form, giving
promise of superiority in the world, ah! why has he caused thee grief and pain?

88. ’Forbid it, that my son should die! (should be short-lived!)--(the thought) creates in me
grief and anxiety; that one athirst, within reach of the eternal draught, should after all
reject and lose it! sad indeed!

89. ’Forbid it, he should lose his wealth and treasure! dead to his house! lost to his country!
for he who has a prosperous son in life, gives pledge that his country’s weal is well
secured;90. ’And then, coming to die, my heart will rest content, rejoicing in the thought.
of offspring surviving me; even as a man possessed of two eyes, one of which keeps watch,
while the other sleeps;

91. ’Not like the frost-flower of autumn, which though it seems to bloom, is not a reality.
A man who, midst his tribe and kindred, deeply loves a spotless son,92. ’At every proper time
in recollection of it has joy; O! that you would cause me to revive!’

The Rishi, knowing the king-sire to be thus greatly afflicted at heart,93. Immediately addressed
the Maharâga: ’Let not the king be for a moment anxious! the words I have spoken to the
king, let him ponder these, and not permit himself to doubt;94. ’The portents now are as
they were before, cherish then no other thoughts! But recollecting I myself am old, on that
account I could not hold my tears;

95. ’For now my end is coming on. But this son of thine will rule the world, born for the sake
of all that lives! this is indeed one difficult to meet with;

96. ’He shall give up his royal estate, escape from the domain of the five desires , with resolution
and with diligence practise austerities, and then awakening, grasp the truth.

97. ’Then constantly, for the world’s sake (all living things), destroying the impediments of
ignorance and darkness, he shall give to all enduring light, the brightness of the sun of
perfect wisdom.

98. ’All flesh submerged in the sea of sorrow; all diseases collected as the bubbling froth;
decay and age like the wild billows; death like the engulfing ocean;99. ’Embarking lightly
in the boat of wisdom he will save the world from all these perils,

by wisdom stemming back the flood. His, pure teaching like to the neighbouring shore,100. ’The
power of meditation, like a cool lake, will be enough for all the unexpected birds;

thus deep and full and wide is the great river of the true law;101. ’All creatures parched by
the drought of lust may freely drink thereof, without stint;

those enchained in the domain of the five desires, those driven along by many sorrows,102. ’And
deceived amid the wilderness of birth and death, in ignorance of the way of escape, for
these Bodhisattva has been born in the world, to open out a way of salvation.

103. ’The fire of lust and covetousness, burning with the fuel of the objects of sense, (on
the flames) he has caused the cloud of his mercy to rise, so that the rain of the law may
extinguish them.104. ’The heavy gates of gloomy unbelief, fast kept by covetousness and lust,
within which are confined all living things, he opens and gives free deliverance.105.
’With the tweezers of his diamond wisdom he plucks out the opposing principles of lustful
desire.In the self-twined meshes of folly and ignorance all flesh poor and in misery, helplessly
(lying),106. ’The king of the law has come forth, to rescue these from bondage.

Let not the king in respect of this his son encourage in himself one thought of doubt or pain;107.
’But rather let him grieve on account of the world, led captive by desire, opposed
to truth;

but I, indeed, amid the ruins of old age and death, am far removed from the meritorious condition
of the holy one,108. ’Possessed indeed of powers of abstraction, yet not within reach
of the gain he will give,to be derived from his teaching as the Bodhisattva; not permitted
to hear his righteous law,109. ’My body worn out, after death, alas! (destined) to be born
as a Deva still liable to the three calamities (old age, decay, and death), (therefore
I weep).’

The king and all his household attendants, hearing the words of the Rishi,110. Knowing the cause
of his regretful sorrow, banished from their minds all further anxiety:

’And now (the king. said) to have begotten this excellent son, gives me rest at heart;111. ’But
that he should leave his kingdom and home, and practise the life of an ascetic, not anxious
to ensure the stability of the kingdom, the thought of this still brings with it pain.’

112. At this time the Rishi, turning to the king with true words, said, ’It must be even as
the king anticipates, he will surely arrive at perfect enlightenment.’

