57. ’Bhrigu, Aṅgira (Aṅgiras?), these two of Rishi family, having passed many years apart from
men, each begat an excellently-endowed son,58. ’Brihaspati with Sukra, skilful in making
royal treatises, not derived from former families (or, tribes);

59. ’Sârasvata, the Rishi, whose works have long disappeared, begat a son, Po-lo-sa, who compiled
illustrious Sutras and Shâstras;60. ’That which now we know and see, is not therefore
dependent on previous connection;Vyâsa, the Rishi, the author of numerous treatises,

61. ’After his death had among his descendants, Poh-mi (Vâlmîki), who extensively collected
Gâthâ sections;Atri, the Rishi, not understanding the sectional treatise on medicine,

62. ’Afterwards begat Âtreya, who was able to control diseases;the twice-born Rishi Kusi (Kusika),
not occupied with heretical treatises,

63. ’Afterwards (begat) Kia-ti-na râga, who thoroughly understood heretical systems;the sugar-cane
monarch, who began his line, could not restrain the tide of the sea,

64. ’But Sagara-râga, his descendant, who begat a thousand royal sons, he could control the
tide of the great sea so that it should come no further.65. ’Ganaka, the Rishi, without a
teacher acquired power of abstraction. All these, who obtained such renown, acquired powers
of themselves;66. ’Those distinguished before, were afterwards forgotten; those before forgotten,
became afterwards distinguished; kings like these and godlike Rishis have no need
of family inheritance,67. ’And therefore the world need not regard those going before or
following.So, mighty king! is it with you, you should experience true joy of heart,68. ’And
because of this joy should banish for ever doubt or anxiety.’

The king hearing the words of the seer was glad, and offered him increased gifts.69. ’Now have
I begotten a valiant (excellent) son (he said), who will establish a wheel authority,

whilst I, when old and grey-headed, will go forth to lead a hermit’s life,70. ’So that my holy
king-like son may not give up the world and wander through mountain forests.’

And now near the spot within the garden, there was a Rishi, leading the life of an ascetic;71.
His name was Asita, wonderfully skilful in the interpretation of signs;

No Chinese

he approached the gate of the palace; the king (beholding him) exclaimed, ’This is none other
but Brahmadeva,72. ’Himself enduring penance from love of true religion, these two characteristics
so plainly visible as marks of his austerities.’

Then the king was much rejoiced;73. And forthwith he invited him within the palace, and with
reverence set before him entertainment,whilst he, entering the inner palace, rejoiced only
(in prospect of) seeing the royal child.74. Although surrounded by the crowd of court-ladies,
yet still he was as if in desert solitude;and now they place a preaching throne and
pay him increased honour and religious reverence,75. As Antideva râga reverenced the priest
Vasishtha.

Then the king addressing the Rishi, said, ’Most fortunate am I,76. ’Great Rishi! that you have
condescended to come here to receive from me becoming gifts and reverence; I pray you therefore
enter on your exhortation.’

77. Thus requested and invited the Rishi felt unutterable joy, and said, ’All hail, ever victorious
monarch! possessed of all noble (virtuous) qualities,

78. ’Loving to meet the desires of those who seek, nobly generous in honouring the true law,
conspicuous as a race for wisdom and humanity, with humble mind you pay me homage, as you
are bound.

79. ’Because of your righteous deeds in former lives, now are manifested these excellent fruits;
listen to me, then, whilst I declare the reason of the present meeting.

80. ’As I was coming on the sun’s way, I heard the Devas in space declare that the king had
born to him (begotten) a royal son, who would arrive at perfect intelligence;

81. ’Moreover I beheld such other portents, as have constrained me now to seek your presence;
desiring to see the Sâkya monarch who will erect the standard of the true law.’

82. The king hearing the Rishi’s. words was fully assured; escaping from the net of doubt, he
ordered an attendant to bring the prince, to exhibit him to the Rishi.

83. The Rishi, beholding the prince, the thousand-rayed wheel on the soles of his feet, the
web-like filament between his fingers, between his eyebrows the white wool-like prominence,84.
His privy parts hidden as those of the horse, his complexion bright and lustrous; seeing
these wonderful birth-portents, the seer wept and sighed deeply.

