170. Composing the one, whilst protecting the seven, removing the seven, guarding and adjusting
the five, reaching to the three, by having learned the three, knowing the two, and removing
the two;

171. Desiring to mortify the passions, and to destroy every enemy of virtue, not multiplying
coarse or unseemly words, but exhorting to virtue in the use of courteous language,172. Full
of sympathy and ready charity, pointing out and practising the way of mutual dependence,

receiving and understanding the wisdom of spirits and Rishis, crushing and destroying every
cruel and hateful thought;173. Thus his fame and virtue were widely renowned,

(and yet himself) finally (or, for ever) separate from the ties of the world, showing the ability
of a master builder, laying a good foundation of virtue, an example for all the earth;174.
So a man’s heart composed and at rest, his limbs and all his members will also be at
ease.

And now the son of Suddhodana, and his virtuous wife Yasodharâ,175. As time went on, growing
to full estate, their child Râhula was born;

and then Suddhodana râga considered thus, ’My son, the prince, having a son born to him,176.
’The affairs of the empire will be handed down in succession, and there will be no end to
its righteous government;

the prince having begotten a son, will love his son as I love him,177. ’And no longer think
about leaving his home as an ascetic, but devote himself to the practice of virtue; I now
have found complete rest of heart, like one just born to heavenly joys.’

178. Like as in the first days of the kalpa, Rishi-kings by the way in which (they walked),
practising pure and spotless deeds, offered up religious offerings, without harm to living
thing,

179. And illustriously prepared an excellent karma, so the king excelling in the excellence
of purity, in family and excellency of wealth, excelling in strength and every exhibition
of prowess,

180. Reflected the glory of his name through the world, as the sun sheds abroad his thousand
rays. But now, being the king of men (or, a king among men), he deemed it right to exhibit
his son’s (prowess),

181. For the sake of his family and kin, to exhibit him; to increase his family’s renown, his
glory spread so high as even to obtain the name of ’God begotten;’ and having partaken of
these heavenly joys,

182. Enjoying the happiness of increased wisdom; understanding the truth, by his own righteousness
derived from previous hearing of the truth; the reward of previous acts, widely known.

183. Would that this might lead my son (he prayed) to love his child and not forsake his home;
the kings of all countries, whose sons have not yet grown up,

184. Have prevented them exercising authority in the empire, in order to give their minds relaxation,
and for this purpose have provided them with worldly indulgences, so that they may
perpetuate the royal seed;

185. So now the king, having begotten a royal son, indulged him in every sort of pleasure; desiring
that he might enjoy these worldly delights, and not wish to wander from his home in
search of wisdom;

186. In former times the Bodhisattva kings, although their way (life) has been restrained (severe),
have yet enjoyed the pleasures of the world, and when they have begotten a son, then
separating themselves from family ties,Have afterwards entered the solitude of the mountains,
to prepare themselves in the way of a silent recluse.

VARGA 3. DISGUST AT SORROW.

