148. (His body exhaled) the perfume of priceless sandal wood, (decorated with) the famed Gambunada
gold (gems); divine medicines (there were) to preserve him in health, glittering necklaces
upon his person;

149. The members of tributary states, hearing that the king had an heir born to him, sent their
presents and gifts of various kinds, oxen, sheep, deer, horses, and chariots,

150. Precious vessels and elegant ornaments, fit to delight the heart of the prince; but though
presented with such pleasing trifles, the necklaces and other pretty ornaments,

151. The mind (nature) of the prince was unmoved, his bodily frame small indeed, but his heart
established; his mind at rest within its own high purposes, was not to be disturbed by
glittering baubles.

152. And now he was brought to learn the useful arts, when lo! once instructed (at one hearing)
he surpassed his teachers. His father, the king, seeing his exceeding talent, and his
deep purpose to have done with the world and its allurements,

153. Began to enquire as to the names of those in his tribe who were renowned for elegance and
refinement. Elegant and graceful, and a lovely maiden, was she whom they called Yasodharâ;

154. In every way fitting to become a consort for the prince; and to allure by pleasant wiles
his heart. The prince with a mind so far removed (from the world), with qualities so distinguished,
and with so charming an appearance,155. Like the elder son of Brahmadeva, Sanatkumâra
(She-na Kiu-ma-lo);

the virtuous damsel, lovely and refined, gentle and subdued in manner;156. Majestic like the
queen of heaven, constant ever, cheerful night and day,

establishing the palace in purity and quiet, full of dignity and exceeding grace,157. Like a
lofty hill rising up in space; or as a white autumn cloud;

warm or cool according to the season; choosing a proper dwelling according to the year,158.
Surrounded by a return of singing women, who join (their voices) in harmonious heavenly concord,
without any jarring or unpleasant sound, exciting (in the hearers) forgetfulness of
worldly cares.

159. As the heavenly Gandharvas of themselves in their beauteous palaces (cause) the singing
women to raise heavenly strains, the sounds of which and their beauty ravish both eyes and
heart;160. (So) Bodhisattva dwelt in his lofty palace, with music such as this.

The king his father, for the prince’s sake, dwelt purely in his palace, practising every virtue;161.
Delighting in the teaching of the true law, he put away from him every evil companion,

(that) his heart might not be polluted by lust; regarding inordinate desire as poison,162. Keeping
his passion and his body in due control, destroying and repressing all trivial thoughts,

desiring to enjoy virtuous conversation, loving instruction (fit) to subdue the hearts of men,163.
Aiming to accomplish the conversion of unbelievers; removing all schemes of opposition
(from whatever source they came),

by the enlightening power of his doctrine, aiming to save the entire world; (thus he desired)
that the body of people should obtain rest;164. Even as we desire to give peace to our children,
so did he long to give rest to the world.

He also attended to his religious duties (sacrificing by fire to all the spirits), with clasped
hands adoring the moon (drinking the moon’s brightness);165. Bathing his body in the waters
of the Ganges; cleansing his heart in the waters of religion, performing his duties
with no private aim, but regarding his child and the people at large,

166. Loving righteous conversation, righteous words with loving (aim), loving words with no
mixture of falsehood, true words imbued by love,

167. And yet withal so modest and self-distrustful, unable on that account to speak as confident
of truth; loving to all, and yet not loving the world, with no thought of selfishness
or covetous desire,

168. Aiming to restrain the tongue and in quietness to find rest from wordy contentions, not
seeking in the multitude of religious duties to condone for a worldly principle in action;

169. But aiming to benefit the world, by a liberal and unostentatious charity; the heart without
any contentious thought, but resolved by goodness to subdue the contentious,

