127. And now in the household of Suddhodana râga, because of the birth of the royal prince,
his clansmen and younger brethren (namesakes), with his ministers, were all generously disposed,

128. Whilst elephants, horses and chariots and the wealth of the country and precious vessels,
daily increased and abounded, being produced wherever requisite;

129. So too countless hidden treasures came of themselves from the earth. From the midst of
the pure snowy mountains, a wild herd of white elephants,130. Without noise, of themselves,
came; not curbed by any, self-subdued,

every kind of colour’d horse, in shape and quality surpassingly excellent,131. With sparkling
jewelled manes and flowing tails, came prancing round, as if with wings; these too, born
in the desert, came at the right time, of themselves.

132. A (herd of) pure-colour’d, well-proportioned cows, fat and fleshy, and remarkable for beauty,
giving fragrant and pure milk with equal flow, came together in great number at this
propitious time:

133. Enmity and envy gave way to peace; content and rest prevailed on every side, whilst there
was closer union amongst the true of heart, discord and variance were entirely appeased;

134. The gentle air distilled a seasonable rain, no crash of storm or tempest was heard, the
springing seeds, not waiting for their time, grew up apace and yielded abundant increase;

135. The five cereals grew ripe with scented grain, soft and glutinous, easy of digestion; all
creatures big with young, possessed their bodies in ease and their frames well-gathered;

136. All men, even those who had not received the seeds of instruction derived from the four
holy ones; all these, throughout the world, born under the control of selfish appetite, without
any thought for others’ goods,

137. Had no proud, envious longings; no angry, hateful thoughts. All men and women were grave
(profound) as the first man of the age (kalpa).

138. All the temples of the gods and sacred shrines, the gardens, wells, and fountains, all
these like things in heaven, produced of themselves, at the proper time, (their several adornments).

139. There was no famishing hunger, the soldiers’ weapons were at rest, all diseases disappeared;
throughout the kingdom all the people were bound close in family love and friendship;

140. Piously affectioned they indulged in mutual pleasures, there were no impure or polluting
desires, they sought their daily gain righteously, no covetous money-loving spirit prevailed,

141. But with religious purpose they gave liberally; there was no thought of any reward (return),
but all practised the four rules of purity; and every hateful thought was suppressed
and destroyed.

142. Even as in days gone by, Manu râga begat a child (called) ’Brilliancy of the Sun,’ on which
there prevailed through the country great prosperity, and all Wickedness came to an end;

143. So now the king having begotten a royal prince, these marks of prosperity were seen; and
because of such a concourse of propitious signs, the child was named Siddhârtha.

144. And now his royal mother, the queen Mâyâ, beholding her son born under such circumstances,
beautiful as a child of heaven, adorned with every excellent distinction,145. From excessive
joy which could not be controlled died, and was born in heaven.

Then Pragâpatî Gautamî, beholding the prince, like an angel,146. With beauty seldom seen on
earth, seeing him thus born and now his mother dead, loved and nourished him as her own child;
and the child regarded her as his mother.

147. So as the light of the sun or the moon, little by little increases, the royal child also
increased each day in every mental excellency and beauty of person;

