The prince seeing the ways prepared and watered, and the joyous holiday appearance of the people,208.
(Seeing too) the drapery and the chariot pure, bright, shining, his heart exulted
greatly and rejoiced.

The people (on their part) gazed at the prince, so beautifully adorned, with all his retinue,209.
Like an assembled company of kings (gathered) to see a heaven-born prince.

And now a Deva-râga of the Pure abode, suddenly appears by the side of the road;210. His form
changed into that of an old man, struggling for life, his heart weak and oppressed.

The prince seeing the old man, filled with apprehension, asked his charioteer,

211. ’What kind of man is this? his head white and his shoulders bent, his eyes bleared and
his body withered, holding a stick to support him along the way.212. ’Is his body suddenly
dried up by the heat, or has he been born in this way?’

The charioteer, his heart much embarrassed, scarcely dared to answer truly,213. Till the pure-born
(Deva) added his spiritual power, and caused him to frame a reply in true words:

’His appearance changed, his vital powers decayed, filled with sorrow, with little pleasure,214.
’His spirits gone, his members nerveless, these are the indications of what is called
"old age."

This man was once a sucking child, brought up and nourished at his mother’s breast,215. ’And
as a youth full of sportive life, handsome, and in enjoyment of the five pleasures; as years
passed on, his frame decaying, he is brought now to the waste of age.’

216. The prince greatly agitated and moved, asked his charioteer another question and said,
’Is yonder man the only one afflicted with age, or shall I, and others also, be such as he?’

217. The charioteer again replied and said, ’Your highness also inherits this lot, as time goes
on, the form itself is changed, and this must doubtless come, beyond all hindrance:218.
’The youthful form must wear the garb of age, throughout the world, this is the common lot.’

Bodhisattva, who had long prepared the foundation of pure and spotless wisdom,219. Broadly setting
the root of every high quality, with a view to gather large fruit in his present life,
hearing these words respecting the sorrow of age, was afflicted in mind, and his hair
stood up-right.

220. Just as the roll of the thunder and the storm alarm and put to flight the cattle; so was
Bodhisattva affected by the words; shaking with apprehension, he deeply sighed;

221. Constrained at heart because of the pain of ’age;’ with shaking head and constant gaze,
he thought upon this misery of decay; what joy or pleasure can men take (he thought),

222. In that which soon must wither, stricken by the marks of age; affecting all without exception;
though gifted now with youth and strength, yet not one but soon must change and pine
away.223. The eye beholding such signs as these before it, how can it not be oppressed
by a desire to escape?

Bodhisattva then addressed his charioteer, `Quickly turn your chariot and go back,224. ’Ever
thinking on this subject of old age approaching, what pleasures now can these gardens afford,

the years of my life like the fast-flying wind; turn your chariot, and with speedy wheels take
me to my palace.’225. And so his heart keeping in the same sad tone, (he was) as one who
returns to a place of entombment;unaffected by any engagement or employment, so he found
no rest in anything within his home.226. The king hearing of his son’s sadness urged (his
companions) to induce him again to go abroad, and forthwith incited his ministers and attendants
to decorate the gardens even more than before.

227. The Deva then caused himself to appear as a sick man; struggling for life, he stood by
the wayside, his body swollen and disfigured, sighing with deep-drawn groans,228. His hands
and knees contracted and sore with disease, his tears flowing as he piteously muttered (his
petition).

