188. Without are pleasant garden glades, flowing fountains, pure refreshing lakes, with every
kind of flower, and trees with fruit, arranged in rows, deep shade beneath.189. There, too,
are various kinds of wondrous birds, flying and sporting in the midst, and on the surface
of the water the four kinds of flowers, bright colour’d, giving out their floating scent;

190. Minstrel maidens cause their songs, and chorded music, to invite the prince. He, hearing
the sounds of singing, sighs for the pleasures of the garden shades,191. And cherishing
within these happy thoughts, he dwelt upon the joys of an outside excursion; even as the chained
elephant ever longs for the free desert wilds.

192. The royal father, hearing that the prince would enjoy to wander through the gardens, first
ordered all his attendant officers to adorn and arrange them, after their several offices:

193. To make level and smooth the king’s highway, to remove from the path all offensive matter,
all old persons, diseased or deformed, all those suffering through poverty or great grief,194.
So that his son in his present humour might see nothing likely to afflict his heart.

The adornments being duly made, the prince was invited to an audience;195. The king seeing his
son approach, patted his head and looking at the colour of his face, feelings of sorrow
and joy intermingled, bound him. His mouth willing to speak, his heart restrained.

196. (Now see) the jewel-fronted gaudy chariot; the four equally-pacing, stately horses; good-tempered
and well-trained; young and of graceful appearance;197. Perfectly pure and white,
and draped with flowery coverings. In the same chariot stands the (stately) driver;

the streets were scattered over with flowers; precious drapery fixed on either side of the way,198.
With dwarfed trees lining the road, costly vessels employed for decoration, hanging
canopies and variegated banners, silken curtains, moved by the rustling breeze,

199. Spectators arranged on either side of the path. With bodies bent and glistening eyes, eagerly
gazing, but not rudely staring, as the blue lotus flower (they bent) drooping in the
air,

200. Ministers and attendants flocking round him, as stars following the chief of the constellation;
all uttering the same suppressed whisper of admiration, at a sight so seldom seen
in the world;

201. Rich and poor, humble and exalted, old and young and middle-aged, all paid the greatest
respect, and invoked blessings on the occasion:

202. So the country-folk and the town-folk, hearing that the prince was coming forth, the well-to-do
not waiting for their servants, those asleep and awake not mutually calling to one
another,

203. The six kinds of creatures not gathered together and penned, the money not collected and
locked up, the doors and gates not fastened, all went pouring along the way on foot;

204. The towers were filled and the mounds by the trees, the windows and the terraces along
the streets; with bent body fearing to lift their eyes, carefully seeing that there was nothing
about them to offend,

205. Those seated on high addressing those seated on the ground, those going on the road addressing
those passing on high, the mind intent on one object alone; so that if a heavenly
form had flown past,206. Or a form entitled to highest respect, there would have been no distraction
visible,

so intent was the body and so immovable the limbs. And now beautiful as the opening lily,207.
He advances towards the garden glades, wishing to accomplish the words of the holy prophet
(Rishi).

