The prince asked his charioteer, ’What sort of man, again, is this?’

229. Replying he said, ’This is a sick man. The four elements all confused and disordered, worn
and feeble, with no remaining strength, bent down with weakness, looking to his fellow-men
for help.’

230. The prince hearing the words thus spoken, immediately became sad and depressed in heart,
and asked, ’Is this the only man afflicted thus, or are others liable to the same (calamity)?’

231. In reply he said, ’Through all the world, men are subject to the same condition; those
who have bodies must endure affliction, the poor and ignorant, as well as the rich and great.’

232. The prince, when these words met his ears, was oppressed with anxious thought and grief;
his body and his mind were moved throughout, just as the moon upon the ruffled tide.

233. ’Placed thus in the great furnace of affliction, say! what rest or quiet can there be!
Alas! that worldly men, (blinded by) ignorance and oppressed with dark delusion,234. ’Though
the robber sickness may appear at any time, yet live with blithe and joyous hearts!’

On this, turning his chariot back again, he grieved to think upon the pain of sickness.235.
As a man beaten and wounded sore, with body weakened, leans upon his staff, so dwelt he in
the seclusion of his palace, lone-seeking, hating worldly pleasures.

236. The king hearing once more of his son’s return, asked anxiously the reason why, and in
reply was told--’he saw the pain of sickness.’ The king in fear like one beside himself,237.
Roundly blamed the keepers of the way; his heart constrained, his lips spoke not;

again he increased the crowd of music women, the sounds of merriment twice louder than aforetime,238.
If by these sounds and sights (the prince) might be gratified; and indulging worldly
feelings, might not hate his home. Night and day the charm of melody increased, but his
heart was still unmoved by it.

239. The king himself then went forth to observe everything successively, and to make the gardens
even yet more attractive, selecting with care the attendant women, that they might excel
in every point of personal beauty;240. Quick in wit and able to arrange matters well,
fit to ensnare men by their winning looks;

he placed additional keepers along the king’s way, he strictly ordered every offensive sight
to be removed,241. And earnestly exhorted the illustrious coachman, to look well and pick
out the road as he went.

And now that Deva of the pure abode, again caused the appearance of a dead man;242. Four persons
carrying the corpse lifted it on high, and appeared (to be going on) in front of Bodhisattva;
the surrounding people saw it not, but only Bodhisattva and the charioteer;

243. (Once more) he asked, ’What is this they carry? with streamers and flowers of every choice
description, whilst the followers are overwhelmed with grief, tearing their hair and wailing
piteously.’

244. And now the gods instructing the coachman, he replied and said,

’This is a "dead man," all his powers of body destroyed, life departed; his heart without thought,
his intellect dispersed;245. ’His spirit gone, his form withered and decayed; stretched
out as a dead log;family ties broken --all his friends who once loved him, clad in white
cerements,246. ’Now no longer delighting to behold him, remove him to lie in some hollow
ditch (tomb).’

The prince hearing the name of DEATH, his heart constrained by painful thoughts,247. He asked,
’Is this the only dead man, or does the world contain like instances?’

Replying thus he said, ’All, everywhere, the same; he who begins his life must end it likewise;248.
’The strong and lusty and the middle-aged, having a body, cannot but decay (and die).’

The prince now harassed and perplexed in mind; his body bent upon the chariot leaning-board,249.
With bated breath and struggling accents, stammered thus, ’Oh worldly men! how fatally
deluded!

