254. The prince on entering the garden, the women came around to pay him court; and to arouse
in him thoughts frivolous; with ogling ways and deep design,

255. Each one setting herself off to best advantage; or joining together in harmonious concert,
clapping their hands, or moving their feet in unison, or joining close, body to body,
limb to limb;

256. Or indulging in smart repartees, and mutual smiles; or assuming a thoughtful saddened countenance,
and so by sympathy to please the prince, and provoke in him a heart affected by
love.

251. But all the women beheld the prince, clouded in brow, and his godlike body not exhibiting
its wonted signs of beauty; fair in bodily appearance, surpassingly lovely,

258. All looked upwards as they gazed, as when we call upon the moon Deva to come; but all their
subtle devices were ineffectual to move Bodhisattva’s heart.

259. At last commingling together they join and look astonished and in fear, silent without
a word.Then there was a Brahmaputra, whose name was called Udâyi (Yau-to-i).

260. (He) addressing the women, said, ’Now all of you, so graceful and fair,(see if you cannot)
by your combined power hit on some device; for beauty’s power is not for ever.

261. ’Still it holds the world in bondage, by secret ways and lustful arts;but no such loveliness
in all the world (as yours), equal to that of heavenly nymphs;

262. ’The gods beholding it would leave their queens, spirits and Rishis would be misled by
it; why not then the prince, the son of an earthly king? why should not his feelings be aroused?

263. ’This prince indeed, though he restrains his heart and holds it fixed, pure-minded, with
virtue uncontaminated, not to be overcome by power of women;

264. ’(Yet) of old there was Sundarî (Su-to-li) able to destroy the great Rishi, and to lead
him to indulge in love, and so degrade his boasted eminence;265. ’Undergoing long penance,
Gautama fell likewise (by the arts of) a heavenly queen;

Shing-kü, a Rishi putra, practising lustful indulgences according to fancy, (was lost).266.
’The Brahman Rishi Visvâmitra (Pi-she-po), living religiously for ten thousand years, deeply
ensnared by a heavenly queen, in one day was completely shipwreck’d in faith;

