284. ’Like the double tree that appears in the desert, with leaves and fruit all perfect and
ripe, the first cut down and destroyed, the other unmoved by apprehension,285. ’So it is
in the case of the mass of men, they have no understanding either!’

At this time Udâyi came to the place where the prince was,286. And observing his silent and
thoughtful mien, unmoved by any desire for indulgence (the five desires),

he forthwith addressed the prince, and said, ’The Mahâraga, by his former appointment,287. ’Has
selected me to act as friend to his son; may I therefore speak some friendly words?

an enlightened friendship (or, friend) is of three sorts, that which removes things unprofitable,288.
’Promotes that which is real gain, and stands by a friend in adversity.

I claim the name of "enlightened friend," and would renounce all that is magisterial,289. ’But
yet not speak lightly or with indifference. What then are the three sources of advantage?
listen, and I will now utter true words, and prove myself a true and sincere adviser.

290. ’When the years are fresh and ripening, beauty and pleasing qualities in bloom, not to
give proper weight to woman’s influence, this is a weak man’s policy (body).291. ’It is right
sometimes to be of a crafty mind, submitting to those little subterfuges,

which find a place in the heart’s undercurrents, and obeying what those thoughts suggest,292.
’In way of pleasures to be got from dalliance, this is no wrong in woman’s (eye)! even if
now the heart has no desire, yet it is fair to follow such devices;

293. ’Agreement (acquiescence) is the joy of woman’s heart, acquiescence is the substance (the
full) of true adornment; but if a man reject these overtures, he’s like a tree deprived
of leaves and fruits;

294. ’Why then ought you to yield and acquiesce? that you may share in all these things. Because
in taking, there’s an end of trouble--no light and changeful thoughts then worry us.

295. ’For pleasure is the first and foremost thought of all, the gods themselves cannot dispense
with it. Lord Sakra was drawn by it to love the wife of Gautama the Rishi;

296. ’So likewise the Rishi Agastya, through a long period of discipline, practising austerities,
from hankering after a heavenly queen (Devî), lost all reward of his religious endeavours,

297. ’The Rishi Brihaspati, and Kandradeva putra; the Rishi Parâsara, and Kavañgara (Kia-pin-ke-lo):298.
’All these, out of many others, were overcome by woman’s love.

