How much more then, in your case, should you partake in such pleasant joys;299. ’Nor refuse,
with wilful heart, to participate in the worldly delights, which your present station, possessed
of such advantages, offers you, in the presence of these attendants.’

300. At this time the royal prince, hearing the words of his friend Udâyi, so skilfully put,
with such fine distinction, cleverly citing worldly instances,

301. Answered thus to Udâyi: ’Thank you for having spoken sincerely to me, let me likewise answer
you in the same way, and let your heart suspend its judgment whilst you listen;

302. ’It is not that I am careless about beauty, or am ignorant of (the power of) human joys,
but only that I see on all the impress of change; therefore my heart is sad and heavy;

303. ’If these things were sure of lasting, without the ills of age, disease, and death, then
would I too take my fill of love; and to the end find no disgust or sadness;

304. ’If you will undertake to cause these women’s beauty not after-while to change or wither,
then, though the joy of love may have its evil, still it might hold the mind in thraldom;

305. (’To know that other) men grow old, sicken, and die, would be enough to rob such joys of
satisfaction; yet how much more in their own case (knowing this) would discontentment fill
the mind;

306. ’(To know) such pleasures hasten to decay, and their bodies likewise; if, notwithstanding
this, men yield to the power of love, their case indeed is like the very beasts.

307. ’And now you cite the names of many Rishis, who practised lustful ways in life; their cases
likewise cause me sorrow, for in that they did these things, they perished.

308. ’Again, you cite the name of that illustrious king, who freely gratified his passions,
but he, in like way, perished in the act; know, then, that he was not a conqueror (Gina);

309. ’With smooth words to conceal an intrigue, and to persuade one’s neighbour to consent,
and by consenting to defile his mind; how can this be called a just device?

310. ’It is but to seduce one with a hollow lie,--such ways are not for me to practise; or,
for those who love the truth and honesty; for they are, forsooth, unrighteous ways,

311. ’And such a disposition is hard to reverence; shaping one’s conduct after one’s likings,
liking this or that, and seeing no harm in it, what method of experience is this!

312. ’A hollow compliance, and a protesting heart, such method is not for me to follow; but
this I know, old age, disease, and death, these are the great afflictions which accumulate,

313. And overwhelm me with their presence; on these I find no friend to speak, alas! alas! Udâyi!
these, after all, are the great concerns;

314. ’The pain of birth, old age, disease, and death; this grief is that we have to fear; the
eyes see all things falling to decay, and yet the heart finds joy in following them;

315. ’But I have little strength of purpose, or command; this heart of mine is feeble and distraught,
reflecting thus on age, disease, and death. Distracted, as I never was before;316.
’Sleepless by night and day, how can I then indulge in pleasure?

Old age, disease, and death consuming me, their certainty beyond a doubt,317. ’And still to
have no heavy thoughts, in truth my heart would be a log or stone.’

Thus the prince, for Uda’s sake, used every kind of skilful argument,318. Describing all the
pains of pleasure; and not perceiving that the day declined.

