746. ’So man when first conceived within the womb, his hands, his feet, and all his separate
members, his spirit and his understanding, of themselves are perfected; but who is he who
does it?

747. ’Who is he that points the prickly thorn? This too is nature, self-controlling. And take
again the different kinds of beasts, these are what they are, without desire (on their part);

748. ’And so, again, the heaven-born beings, whom the self-existent (Isvara) rules, and all
the world of his creation; these have no self-possessed power of expedients;749. ’For if they
had a means of causing birth, there would be also (means) for controlling death, and then
what need of self-contrivance, or seeking for deliverance?

750. ’There are those who say, "I" (the soul) is the cause of birth, and others who affirm,
"I" (the soul) is the cause of death. There are some who say, "Birth comes from nothingness,
and without any plan of ours we perish:"

751. ’Thus one is born a fortunate child, removed from poverty, of noble family, or learned
in testamentary lore of Rishis, or called to offer mighty sacrifices to the gods,752. ’Born
in either state, untouched by poverty, then their famous name becomes to them "escape,"

their virtues handed down by name to us; yet if these attained their happiness (found deliverance),753.
’Without contrivance of their own, how vain and fruitless is the toil of those
who seek "escape."

And you, desirous of deliverance, purpose to practise some high expedient,754. ’Whilst your
royal father frets and sighs; for a short while you have assayed the road,

and leaving home have wandered thro’ the wilds, to return then would not now be wrong;755. ’Of
old, king Ambarîsha for a long while dwelt in the grievous forest, leaving his retinue
and all his kinsfolk, but afterwards returned and took the royal office;

756. ’And so Râma, son of the king of the country, leaving his country occupied the mountains,
but hearing he was acting contrary to usage, returned and governed righteously.

757. ’And so the king of Sha-lo-po, called To-lo-ma (Druma), father and son, both wandered forth
as hermits, but in the end came back again together;

758. ’So Po-’sz-tsau Muni (Vasishtha?), with On-tai-tieh (Âtreya?), in the wild mountains practising
as Brahmakârins, these too returned to their own country.759. ’Thus all these worthies
of a by-gone age, famous for their advance in true religion, came back home and royally
governed, as lamps enlightening the world.760. ’Wherefore for you to leave the mountain
wilds, religiously to rule, is not a crime.’

The royal prince, listening to the great minister, loving words without excess of speaking,761.
Full of sound argument, clear and unconfused, with no desire to wrangle after the way
of the schools, with fixed purpose, deliberately speaking, thus answered the great minister:

762. ’The question of being and not-being is an idle one, only adding to the uncertainty of
an unstable mind, and to talk of such matters I have no strong (fixed) inclination;763. ’Purity
of life, wisdom, the practice of asceticism, these are matters to which I earnestly
apply myself,

the world is full of empty studies (discoveries) which our teachers in their office skilfully
involve;764. ’But they are without any true principle, and I will none of them!

The enlightened man distinguishes truth from falsehood; but how can truth (faith) be born from
such as those?765. ’For they are like the man born blind, leading the blind man as a guide;
as in the night, as in thick darkness [both wander on], what recovery is there for them?

766. Regarding the question of the pure and impure, the world involved in self-engendered doubt
cannot perceive the truth; better to walk along the way of purity,767. Or rather follow
the pure law of self-denial, hate the practice of impurity,

reflect on what was said of old, not obstinate in one belief or one tradition,768. ’With sincere
(empty) mind, accepting all true words, and ever banishing sinful sorrow (i.e. sin, the
cause of grief). Words which exceed sincerity (simplicity of purpose) are vainly (falsely)
spoken; the wise man uses not such words.

769. As to what you say of Râma and the rest, leaving their home, practising a pure life, and
then returning to their country, and once more mixing themselves in sensual pleasures,770.
’Such men as these walk vainly; those who are wise place no dependence on them.

Now, for your sakes, permit me, briefly, to recount this one true principle (i.e. purpose) (of
action):771. "The sun, the moon may fall to earth, Sumeru and all the snowy mountains overturn,
but I will never change my purpose; rather than enter a forbidden place,772. ’"Let
me be cast into the fierce fire; not to accomplish rightly (what I have entered on),and
to return once more to my own land, there to enter the fire of the five desires,773. ’"Let
it befall me as my own oath records:"--so spake the prince, his arguments as pointed as the
brightness of the perfect sun;

then rising up he passed some distance off.’774. The Purohita and the minister, their words
and discourse prevailing nothing,

