693. ’All these several kings refused not the royal crown, the jewels, and the ornaments of
person; their hands and feet were adorned with gems,694. ’Around them were women to delight
and please, these things they cast not from them, for the sake of escape;

you then may also come back home, and undertake both necessary duties;695. ’Your mind prepare
itself in higher law, whilst for the sake of earth you wield the sceptre;

let there be no more weeping, but comply with what we say, and let us publish it;696. ’And having
published it with your authority, then you may return and receive respectful welcome.

Your father and your mother, for your sake, in grief shed tears like the great ocean;697. ’Having
no stay and no dependence now--no source from which the Sâkya stem may grow--you ought,
like the captain of the ship, to bring it safely across to a place of safety.

698. ’The royal prince Pi-san-ma, as also Lo-me-po-ti, they respectfully attended to the command
of their father, you also should do the same!

699. ’Your loving mother who cherished you so kindly, with no regard for self, through years
of care, as the cow deprived of her calf, weeps and laments, forgetting to eat or sleep;

700. ’You surely ought to return to her at once, to protect her life from evil; as a solitary
bird, away from its fellows, or as the lonely elephant, wandering through the jungle,701.
’Losing the care of their young, ever think of protecting and defending them,

so you the only child, young and defenceless, not knowing what you do, bring trouble and solicitude;702.
’Cause, then, this sorrow to dissipate itself; as one who rescues the moon from
being devoured,

so do you reassure the men and women of the land, and remove from them the consuming grief,703.
’(And suppress) the sighs that rise like breath to heaven, which cause the darkness that
obscures their sight; seeking you, as water, to quench the fire, the fire quenched, their
eyes shall open.’

704. Bodhisattva, hearing of his father the king, experienced the greatest distress of mind,
and sitting still, gave himself to reflection; and then, in due course, replied respectfully:

705. ’I know indeed that my royal father is possessed of a loving and deeply considerate mind,
but my fear of birth, old age, disease, and death has led me to disobey, and disregard
his extreme kindness.

706. ’Whoever neglects right consideration about his present life, and because he hopes to escape
in the end, therefore disregards all precautions (in the present), on this man comes
the inevitable doom of death.707. ’It is the knowledge of this, therefore, that weighs with
me, and after long delay has constrained me to a hermit’s life;

hearing of my father, the king, and his grief, my heart is affected with increased love;708.
But yet, all is like the fancy of a dream, quickly reverting to nothingness.

Know then, without fear of contradiction, that the nature of existing things is not uniform;709.
’The cause of sorrow is not necessarily the relationship of child with parent, but that
which produces the pain of separation, results from the influence of delusion;

710. ’As men going along a road suddenly meet mid-way with others, and then a moment more are
separated, each one going his own way,

711. ’So by the force of concomitance, relationships are framed, and then, according to each
one’s destiny, there is separation; he who thoroughly investigates this false connection
of relationship ought not to cherish in himself grief;712. ’In this world there is rupture
of family love, in another life (world) it is sought for again; brought together for a moment,
again rudely divided, everywhere the fetters of kindred are formed!713. ’Ever being
bound, and ever being loosened! who can sufficiently lament such constant separations;

born into the world, and then gradually changing, constantly separated by death and then born
again.714. ’All things which exist in time must perish, the forests and mountains all things
thus exist;

in time are born all sensuous things (things possessing the five desires), so is it both with
worldly substance and with time.715. ’Because, then, death pervades all time, get rid of
death, and time will disappear.

You desire to make me king, and it is difficult to resist the offices of love;716. ’But as a
disease (is difficult to bear) without medicine, so neither can I bear (this weight of dignity);
in every condition, high or low, we find folly and ignorance, (and men) carelessly
following the dictates of lustful passion;

717. ’At last, we come to live in constant fear; thinking anxiously of the outward form, the
spirit droops; following the ways of men , the mind resists the right; but, the conduct of
the wise is not so.

