718. ’The sumptuously ornamented and splendid palace (I look upon) as filled with fire; the
hundred dainty dishes (tastes) of the divine kitchen, as mingled with destructive poisons;719.
’The lily growing on the tranquil lake, in its midst harbours countless noisome insects;

and so the towering abode of the rich is the house of calamity; the wise will not dwell therein.720.
’In former times illustrious kings, seeing the many crimes of their home and country,
affecting as with poison the dwellers therein, in sorrowful disgust sought comfort in
seclusion;

721. ’We know, therefore, that the troubles of a royal estate are not to be compared with the
repose of a religious life; far better dwell in the wild mountains, and eat the herbs like
the beasts of the field;722. ’Therefore I dare not dwell in the wide palace, for the black
snake has its dwelling there.

I reject the kingly estate and the five desires [desires of the senses], to escape such sorrows
I wander thro’ the mountain wilds.723. ’This, then, would be the consequence of compliance,
that I;who, delighting in religion, am gradually getting wisdom, should now quit these
quiet woods, and returning home, partake of sensual pleasures,724. ’And thus by night and
day increase my store of misery. Surely this is not what should be done!

that the great leader of an illustrious tribe, having left his home from love of religion,725.
’And for ever turned his back upon tribal honour, desiring to confirm his purpose as a
leader,--that he,--discarding outward form, clad in religious garb, loving religious meditation,
wandering thro’ the wilds,--

726. ’Should now reject his hermit vestment, tread down his sense of proper shame (and give
up his aim). This, though I gained heaven’s kingly state, cannot be done! how much less to
gain an earthly, though distinguished, home!727. ’For having spued forth lust, passion, and
ignorance, shall I return to feed upon it? as a man might go back to his vomit! such misery,
how could I bear?

728. ’Like a man whose house has caught fire, by some expedient finds a way to escape, will
such a man forthwith go back and enter it again? such conduct would disgrace a man!729. ’So
I, beholding the evils, birth, old age, and death, to escape the misery, have become a hermit;
shall I then go back and enter in, and like a fool dwell in their company?730. ’He
who enjoys a royal estate and yet seeks rescue, cannot dwell thus, this is no place for him;
escape (rescue) is born from quietness and rest; to be a king is to add distress and poison;

731. ’To seek for rest and yet aspire to royal condition is but a contradiction, royalty and
rescue, motion and rest, like fire and water, having two principles, cannot be united.

732. ’So one resolved to seek escape cannot abide possessed of kingly dignity! and if you say
a man may be a king, and at the same time prepare deliverance for himself,733. ’There is
no certainty in this! to seek certain escape is not to risk it thus;

it is through this uncertain frame of mind that once a man gone forth is led to go back home
again;734. ’But I, my mind is not uncertain; severing the baited hook of relationship, with
straightforward purpose, I have left my home. Then tell me, why should I return again?’

735. The great minister, inwardly reflecting, (thought), ’The mind of the royal prince, my master,
is full of wisdom, and agreeable to virtue, what he says is reasonable and fitly framed.’736.
Then he addressed the prince and said: ’According to what your highness states,

he who seeks religion must seek it rightly; but this is not the fitting time (for you);737.
’Your royal father, old and of declining years, thinking of you his son, adds grief to grief;

you say indeed, "I find my joy in rescue. To go back would be apostacy."738. ’But yet your joy
denotes unwisdom, and argues want of deep reflection; you do not see, because you seek
the fruit, how vain to give up present duty.

739. ’There are some who say, There is "hereafter;" others there are who say, "Nothing hereafter."
So whilst this question hangs in suspense, why should a man give up his present pleasure?

740. ’If perchance there is "hereafter," we ought to bear (patiently) what it brings; if you
say, "Hereafter is not," then there is not either rescue (salvation)!

741. ’If you say, "Hereafter is," you would not say, "Salvation causes it." As earth is hard,
or fire is hot, or water moist, or wind is mobile,742. ’"Hereafter" is just so. It has its
own distinct nature.

So when we speak of pure and impure, each comes from its own distinctive nature.743. ’If you
should say, "By some contrivance this can be removed," such an opinion argues folly.

Every root within the moral world (world or domain of conduct) has its own nature predetermined;744.
’Loving remembrance and forgetfulness, these have their nature fixed and positive;

so likewise age, disease, and death, these sorrows, who can escape by strategy? (contrivance,
upâya).745. ’If you say, "Water can put out fire," or "Fire can cause water to boil and
pass away," (then this proves only that) distinctive natures may be mutually destructive;
but nature in harmony produces living things;

