665. The king now suppressing (regulating) his grief, urged an his great teacher and chief minister,
as one urges on with whip a ready horse, to hasten onwards as the rapid stream;666.
Whilst they fatigued, yet with unflagging effort, come to the place of the sorrow-giving
grove;

then laying on one side the five outward marks of dignity and regulating well their outward
gestures,667. They entered the Brahmans’ quiet hermitage, and paid reverence to the Rishis.
They, on their part, begged them to be seated, and repeated the law for their peace and
comfort.

668. Then forthwith they addressed the Rishis and said: ’We have on our minds a subject on which
we would ask (for advice). There is one who is called Suddhodana râga, a descendant of
the famous Ikshvâku family,669. ’We are his teacher and his minister, who instruct him in
the sacred books as required.

The king indeed is like Indra (for dignity); his son, like Ke-yan-to (Gayanta),670. ’In order
to escape old age, disease, and death, has become a hermit, and depends on this; on his
account have we come hither, with a view to let your worships know of this.’

671. Replying, they said: ’With respect to this youth,. has he long arms and the signs of a
great man? Surely he is the one who, enquiring into our practice, discoursed so freely on
the matter of life and death.672. ’He has gone to the abode of Arâda, to seek for a complete
mode of escape.’

Having received this certain information, respectfully considering the urgent commands of the
anxious king,673. They dared not hesitate in their undertaking, but straightway took the
road and hastened on.Then seeing the wood in which the royal prince dwelt, and him, deprived
of all outward marks of dignity,674. His body still glorious with lustrous shining, as
when the sun comes forth from the black cloud;

then the religious teacher of the country and the great minister holding to the true law,675.
Put off from them their courtly dress, and descending from the chariot gradually advanced,

like the royal Po-ma-ti (? Bharata) and the Rishi Vasishtha,676. Went through the woods and
forests, and seeing the royal prince Râma, each according to his own prescribed manner, paid
him reverence, as he advanced to salute him;

677. Or as Sukra, in company with Aṅgiras, with earnest heart paid reverence, and sacrificed
to Indra râga.

678. Then the royal prince in return paid reverence to the . royal teacher and the great minister,
as the divine Indra placed at their ease Sukra and Aṅgiras;679. Then, at his command,
the two men seated themselves before the prince, as Pou-na (Punarvasû) and Pushya, the
twin stars attend beside the moon;

680. Then the Purohita and the great minister respectfully explained to the royal prince, even
as Pi-li-po-ti (Brihaspati) spoke to that Gayanta:

681. ’Your royal father, thinking of the prince, is pierced in heart, as with an iron point;
his mind distracted, raves in solitude; he sleeps upon the dusty ground;682. ’By night and
day he adds to his sorrowful reflections; his tears flow down like the incessant rain;

and now to seek you out, he has sent us hither. Would that you would listen with attentive mind;683.
’We know that you delight to act religiously; it is certain, then, without a doubt,

this is not the time for you to be a hermit (to enter the forest wilds); a feeling of deep pity
consumes our heart!684. ’You, if you be indeed, moved by religion, ought to feel some
pity for our case;let your kindly feelings flow abroad, to comfort us who are worn at heart;685.
’Let not the tide of sorrow and of sadness completely overwhelm the outlets of our
heart;

as the torrents (which roll down) the grassy mountains; or the calamities of tempest, fiery
heat, and lightning;686. ’For so the grieving heart has these four sorrows, turmoil and drought;
passion and overthrow.

But come! return to your native place, the time will arrive when you can go forth again as a
recluse.687. ’But now to disregard your family duties, to turn against father and mother,
how can this be called love and affection? that love which overshadows and embraces all.

688. ’Religion requires not the wild solitudes; you can practise a hermit’s duties in your home;
studiously thoughtful, diligent in expedients, this is to lead a hermit’s life in truth.

689. A shaven head, and garments soiled with dirt,--to wander by yourself through desert wilds,--this
is but to encourage constant fears, and cannot be rightly called "an awakened hermit’s
(life)."690. ’Would rather we might take you by the hand, and sprinklewater on your
head, and crown you with a heavenly diadem, and place you underneath a flowery canopy,691.
’That all eyes might gaze with eagerness upon you; after this, in truth, we would leave
our home with joy.

The former kings Teou-lau-ma (Druma?), A-neou-ke-o-sa (Anugasa or Anudâsa),692. ’Po-ke-lo-po-yau
(Vagrabâhu), Pi-po-to-’an-ti (Vaibhrâga), Pi-ti-o-ke-na (Vatâgana?), Na-lo-sha-po-lo
(Narasavara?),

