323. And so the king increased the means for gratifying the appetite for pleasure; both night
and day the joys of music wore out the prince, opposed to pleasure;324. Disgusted with them,
he desired their absence, his mind was weaned from all such thoughts, he only thought
of age, disease, and death; as the lion wounded by an arrow.

325. The king then sent his chief ministers, and the most distinguished of his family, young
in years and eminent for beauty, as well as for wisdom and dignity of manners,326. To accompany,
and rest with him, both night and day, in order to influence the prince’s mind.

And now within a little interval, the prince again requested the king that he might go abroad.327.
Once more the chariot and the well-paced horses were prepared, adorned with precious
substances and every gem; and then with all the nobles, his associates, surrounding him,
he left the city gates:

328. Just as the four kinds of flower, when the sun shines, open out their leaves, so was the
prince in all his spiritual splendour; effulgent in the beauty of his youth time;

329. As he proceeded to the gardens from the city, the road was well prepared, smooth, and wide,
the trees were bright with flowers and fruit, his heart was joyous, and forgetful of
its care.

330. Now by the roadside as he beheld the ploughmen, plodding along the furrows, and the writhing
worms, his heart again was moved with piteous feeling, and anguish pierced his soul
afresh;331. To see those labourers at their toil, struggling with painful work, their bodies
bent, their hair dishevelled, the dripping sweat upon their faces, their persons fouled
with mud and dust;332. The ploughing oxen, too, bent by the yokes, their lolling tongues
and gaping mouths; the nature of the prince, loving, compassionate, his mind conceived most
poignant sorrow,

333. And nobly moved to sympathy, he groaned with pain; then stooping down he sat upon the ground,
and watched this painful scene of suffering; reflecting on the ways of birth and death!334.
’Alas! he cried, for all the world! how dark and ignorant, void of understanding!’
And then to give his followers chance of rest, he bade them each repose where’er they list;

335. Whilst he beneath the shadow of a Gambu tree, gracefully seated, gave himself to thought.
He pondered on the fact of life and death, inconstancy, and endless progress to decay.

336. His heart thus fixed without confusion, the five desires (senses) covered and clouded over,
lost in possession of enlightenment and insight, he entered on the first pure state of
ecstacy.

337. All low desire removed, most perfect peace ensued; and fully now in Samâdhi (he saw) the
misery and utter sorrow of the world; the ruin wrought by age; disease, and death;

338. The great misery following on the body’s death and yet men not awakened to the truth! oppressed
with others’ suffering (age, disease, and death), this load of sorrow weigh’d his
mind;

339. ’I now will seek (he said) a noble law, unlike the worldly methods known to men, I will
oppose disease and age and death, and strive against the mischief wrought by these on men.’

340. Thus lost in tranquil contemplation, (he considered that) youth, vigour, and strength of
life, constantly renewing themselves, without long stay, in the end fulfil the rule of ultimate
destruction;

341. (Thus he pondered) without excessive joy or grief, without hesitation or confusion of thought,
without dreaminess or extreme longing, without aversion or discontent,342. But perfectly
at peace, with no hindrance, radiant with the beams of increased illumination.

At this time a Deva of the Pure abode, transforming himself into the shape of a Bhikshu,343.
Came to the place where the prince was seated;

the prince with due consideration rose to meet him, and asked him who he was. In reply he said,
’I am a Shâman,344. ’Depressed and sad at thought of age, disease, and death, I have left
my home to seek some way of rescue,

but everywhere I find old age, disease, and death, all (things) hasten to decay and there is
no permanency;345. ’Therefore I search for the happiness of something that decays not, that
never perishes, that never knows beginning,

that looks with equal mind on enemy and friend, that heeds not wealth nor beauty,346. ’The happiness
of one who finds repose alone in solitude, in some unfrequented dell,

free from molestation, all thoughts about the world destroyed, dwelling in some lonely hermitage,347.
’Untouched by any worldly source of pollution, begging for food sufficient for the
body.’ And forthwith as he stood before the prince, gradually rising up he disappeared
in space.

