348. The prince with joyful mind, considering, recollected former Buddhas, established thus
in perfect dignity of manner; with noble mien and presence, as this visitor.349. Thus calling
things to mind with perfect self-possession, he reached the thought of righteousness,

and by what means it can be gained. Indulging thus for length of time in thoughts of religious
solitude,350. He now suppressed his feelings and controlled his members, and rising turned
again towards the city.

His followers all flocked after him, calling him to stop and not go far from them,351. But in
his mind these secret thoughts so held him, devising means by which to escape from the world,

that tho’ his body moved along the road, his heart was far away among the mountains;352. Even
as the bound and captive elephant, ever thinks about his desert wilds.

The prince now entering the city, there met him men and women, earnest for their several ends;353.
The old besought him for their children, the young sought something for the wife, others
sought something for their brethren; all those allied by kinship or by family,

354. Aimed to obtain their several suits, all of them joined in relationship dreading the pain
(expectation) of separation. And now the prince’s heart was filled with joy, as he suddenly
heard those words ’separation and association.’355. ’These are joyful sounds to me,’
he said, ’they assure me that my vow shall be accomplished.’ Then deeply pondering the joy
of ’snapped relationship,’ the idea of Nirvâna, deepened and widened in him,356. His body
as a peak of the Golden Mount, his shoulder like the elephant’s, his voice like the spring-thunder,
his deep-blue eye like that of the king of oxen,357. His mind full of religious
thoughts (aims), his face bright as the full moon, his step like that of the lion king, thus
he entered his palace,

358. Even as the son of Lord Sakra (or, Sakra-putra) his mind reverential, his person dignified,
he went straight to his father’s presence, and with head inclined, enquired, ’Is the
king well?’359. Then he explained his dread of age, disease, and death, and sought respectfully
permission to become a hermit.’For all things in the world’ (he said), ’though now united,
tend to separation;’360. Therefore he prayed to leave the world; desiring to find ’true
deliverance.’

His royal father hearing the words ’leave the world,’ was forthwith seized with great heart-trembling,361.
Even as the strong wild elephant shakes with his weight the boughs of some
young sapling; going forward, seizing the prince’s hands, with falling tears, he spake as
follows:

362. ’Stop! nor speak such words, the time is not yet come for "a religious life," you are young
and strong, your heart beats full, to lead a religious life frequently involves trouble,

363. ’It is rarely possible to hold the desires in check, the heart not yet estranged from their
enjoyment; to leave your home and lead a painful ascetic life, your heart can hardly
yet resolve on such a course;

364. ’To dwell amidst the desert wilds or lonely dells, this heart of yours would not be perfectly
at rest, for though you love religious matters, you are not yet like me in years;365.
’You should undertake the kingdom’s government, and let me first adopt ascetic life; but
to give up your father and your sacred duties, this is not to act religiously;

366. ’You should suppress this thought of "leaving home," and undertake your worldly duties,
find your delight in getting an illustrious name, and after this give up your home and family.’

367. The prince, with proper reverence and respectful feelings, again besought his royal father;
but promised if he could be saved from four calamities, that he would give up the thought
of ’leaving home;’

368. If he would grant him life without end, no disease, nor undesirable old age, and no decay
of earthly possessions; then he would obey and give up the thought of ’leaving home.’

369. The royal father then addressed the prince, ’Speak not such words as these, for with respect
to these four things, who is there able to prevent them, or say nay to their approach;370.
’Asking such things as these (four things), you would provoke men’s laughter! But put
away this thought of "leaving home," and once more take yourself to pleasure.’371. The
prince again besought his father, ’If you may not grant me these four prayers, then let me
go I pray, and leave my home. O! place no difficulties in my path;

372. ’Your son is dwelling in a burning house, would you indeed prevent his leaving it! To solve
a doubt is only reasonable, who could forbid a man to seek its explanation?

373. ’Or if he were forbidden, then by self-destruction he might solve the difficulty, in an
unrighteous way: and if he were to do so, who could restrain him after death?’

374. The royal father, seeing his son’s mind so firmly fixed that it could not be turned, and
that it would be waste of strength to bandy further words or arguments,

375. Forthwith commanded more attendant women, to provoke still more his mind to pleasure; day
and night (he ordered them) to keep the roads and ways, to the end that he might not leave
his palace;376. (He moreover ordered) all the ministers of the country to come to the
place where dwelt the prince, to quote and illustrate the rules of filial piety, hoping to
cause him to obey the wishes of the king.

