And now the prince seated, in his beauty, looked with thought on all the waiting women;394.
Before, they had appeared exceeding lovely, their laughing words, their hearts so light and
gay, their forms so plump and young, their looks so bright; but now, how changed! so uninviting
and repulsive.

395. And such is woman’s disposition! how can they, then, be ever dear, or closely trusted;
such false appearances! and unreal pretences; they only madden and delude the minds of men.396.
And now (he said), ’I have awakened to the truth! Resolved am I to leave such false
society.’At this time the Deva of the Pure abode descended and approached, unfastening the
doors.397. The prince, too, at this time rose and walked along, amid the prostrate forms
of all the women; with difficulty reaching to the inner hall, he called to Kandaka, in these
words,

398. ’My mind is now athirst and longing for the draught of the fountain of sweet dew, saddle
then my horse, and quickly bring it here. I wish to reach the deathless city;399. ’My heart
is fixed beyond all change, resolved I am and bound by sacred oath;

these women, once so charming and enticing, now behold I altogether loathsome;400. ’The gates,
which were before fast-barred and locked, now stand free and open! these evidences of something
supernatural, point to a climax of my life.’

401. Then Kandaka stood reflecting inwardly, whether to obey or not the prince’s order, without
informing his royal father of it, and so incur the heaviest punishment.

402. The Devas then gave spiritual strength; and unperceived the horse equipped came round,
with even pace; a gallant steed, with all his jewelled trappings for a rider;

403. High-maned, with flowing tail, broad-backed, short-haired and ear’d, with belly like the
deer’s, head like the king of parrots, wide forehead, round and claw-shaped nostrils,

404. Breath like the dragon’s, with breast and shoulders square, true and sufficient marks of
his high breed. The royal prince, stroking the horse’s neck, and rubbing down his body,
said,

405. ’My royal father ever rode on thee, and found thee brave in fight slid fearless of the
foe; now I desire to rely on thee alike! to carry me far off to the stream (ford) of endless
life,

406. ’To fight against and overcome the opposing force of men, the men who associate in search
of pleasure, the men who engage in the search after wealth, the crowds who follow and flatter
such persons;

407. ’In opposing sorrow, friendly help is difficult (to find), in seeking religious truth there
must be rare enlightenment, let us then be knit together thus as friends; then, at last,
there will be rest from sorrow.

408. ’But now I wish to go abroad, to give deliverance from pain; now then, for your own sake
it is, and for the sake of all your kind,409. ’That you should exert your strength, with
noble pace, without lagging or weariness.’

Having thus exhorted him, he bestrode his horse, and grasping the reins, proceeded forth;410.
The man like the sun shining forth from his tabernacle (sun-palace streams), the horse like
the white floating cloud (the white cloud-pile),

