377. The prince, beholding his royal father bathed with tears and o’erwhelmed with grief, forthwith
returned to his abode, and sat himself in silence to consider;

378. All the women of the palace, coming towards him, waited as they circled him, and gazed
in silence on his beauteous form. They gazed upon him not with furtive glance,379. But like
the deer in autumn brake looks wistfully at the hunter;around the prince’s straight and
handsome form, (bright) as the mountain of true gold (Sumeru),380. The dancing women gathered
doubtingly, waiting to hear him bid them sound their music; repressing every feeling of
the heart through fear, even as the deer within the brake;

381. Now gradually the day began to wane, the prince still sitting in the evening light, his
glory streaming forth in splendour, as the sun lights up Mount Sumeru;

382. Thus seated on his jewelled couch, surrounded by the fumes of sandal-wood, the dancing
women took their places round; then sounded forth their heavenly (Gandharva) music,383. Even
as Vaisaman (Vaisravana) produces every kind of rare and heavenly sounds.

The thoughts which dwelt within the prince’s mind entirely drove from him desire for music,384.
And tho’ the sounds filled all the place, they fell upon his ear unnoticed.

At this time the Deva of the Pure abode, knowing the prince’s time was come,385. The destined
time for quitting home, suddenly assumed a form and came to earth, to make the shapes of
all the women unattractive, so that they might create disgust,

386. And no desire arise from thought of beauty. Their half-clad forms bent in ungainly attitudes,
forgetful in their sleep, their bodies crooked or supine, the instruments of music
lying scattered in disorder;387. Leaning and facing one another, or with back to back, or
like those beings thrown into the abyss,

their jewelled necklets bound about like chains, their clothes and undergarments swathed around
their persons;388. Grasping their instruments, stretched along the earth, even as those
undergoing punishment at the hands of keepers (eunuchs), their garments in confusion, or
like the broken kani flower (poppy?);

389. Or some with bodies leaning in sleep against the wall, in fashion like a hanging bow or
horn, or with their hands holding to the window-frames, and looking like an outstretched
corpse;390. Their mouths half opened or else gaping wide, the loathsome dribble trickling
forth,

their heads uncovered and in wild disorder, like some unreasoning madman’s;391. The flower wreaths
torn and hanging across their face, or slipping off the face upon the ground; others
with body raised as if in fearful dread, just like the lonely desert(?) bird;

392. Or others pillowed on their neighbour’s lap, their hands and feet entwined together, whilst
others smiled or knit their brows in turn, some with eyes closed and open mouth,393.
Their bodies lying in wild disorder, stretched here and there, like corpses thrown together.

