418. And now the night was in a moment gone, and sight restored to all created things, (when
the royal prince) looked thro’ the wood, and saw the abode of Po-ka, the Rishi; [the hermitage
of the Bhârgavides, see Burnouf, Introduction to Ind. Bud. p. 385];419. The purling
streams so exquisitely pure and sparkling, and the wild beasts all unalarmed at man, caused
the royal prince’s heart to exult.

Tired, the horse stopped of his own will, to breathe.420. ’This, then,’ he thought, ’is a good
sign and fortunate, and doubtless indicates divine approval.’

And now he saw belonging to the Rishi, the various vessels used for (asking) charity;421. And
(other things) arranged by him in order, without the slightest trace of negligence.

Dismounting then he stroked his horse’s head, and cried, ’You now have borne me (well)!’422.
With loving eyes he looked at Kandaka, (eyes) like the pure cool surface of a placid lake
(and said),

’Swift-footed! like a horse in pace, yea! swift as any light-winged bird,423. ’Ever have you
followed after me when riding, and deeply have I felt my debt of thanks,

but not yet had you been tried in other ways; I only knew you as a man true-hearted,424. ’My
mind now wonders at your active powers of body;

these two I now begin to see (are yours); a man may have a heart most true and faithful, but
strength of body may not too be his;425. ’Bodily strength and perfect honesty of heart, I
now have proof enough are yours.

(To be content) to leave the tinselled world, and with swift foot to follow me,426. ’Who would
do this but for some profit, if without profit to his kin, who would not shun it? but you,
with no private aim, have followed me, not seeking any present recompense;

427. ’As we nourish and bring up a child, to bind together and bring honour to a family; so
we also reverence and obey a father, to gain (obedience and attention) from a begotten son;428.
’In this way all think of their own advantage; but you have come with me disdaining
profit;

with many words I cannot hold you here, so let me say in brief to you,429. ’We have now ended
our relationship; take, then, my horse and ride back again; for me, during the long night
past, that place I sought to reach now I have obtained.’

430. Then taking off his precious neck-chain, he handed it to Kandaka, ’Take this,’ he said,
’I give it you, let it console you in your sorrow;’

431. The precious jewel in the tire (sic--JBH) that bound his head, bright-shining, lighting
up his person, taking off and placing in his extended palm, like the sun which lights up
Sumeru,

432. He said, ’O Kandaka! take this gem, and going back to where my father is, take the jewel
and lay it reverently before him, to signify my heart’s relation to him;433. ’And then,
for me, request the king to stifle every fickle feeling of affection,

and say that I, to escape from birth and age and death, have entered on the wild (forest) of
painful discipline,434. ’Not that I may get a heavenly birth, much less because I have no
tenderness of heart, or that I cherish any cause of bitterness, but only that I may escape
this weight of sorrow;

435. ’The accumulated long-night weight of covetous desire (love), I now desire to ease the
load (cause a break), so that it may be overthrown for ever; therefore I seek the way (cause)
of ultimate escape;436. ’If I should obtain emancipation, then shall I never need to put
away my kindred,

to leave my home, to sever ties of love. O! grieve not for your son!437. ’The five desires of
sense beget the sorrow; those held by lust themselves induce the sorrow;

my very ancestors, victorious kings, thinking (their throne) established and immovable,438.
’Have handed down to me their kingly wealth;

I, thinking only on religion, put it all away; the royal mothers at the end of life their cherished
treasures leave for their sons,439. ’Those sons who covet much such worldly profit;

