The prince considering this garment of his, the colour of the ground, a fitting pure attire,484.
Becoming to the utmost the person of a Rishi, not fit for a hunter’s dress, forthwith
called to the hunter, as he stood before him, in accents soft, and thus addressed him:485.
’That dress of thine belikes me much, as if it were not foul, and this my dress I’ll give
thee in exchange, so please thee.’

486. The hunter then addressed the prince, Although I ill can spare (am not unattached to) this
garment, which I use as a disguise among the deer, that alluring them within reach I may
kill them,487. ’Notwithstanding, as it so pleases you, I am now willing to bestow it in
exchange for yours.’

The hunter having received the sumptuous dress, took again his heavenly body.488. The prince
and Kandaka, the coachman, seeing this, thought deeply thus,

’This garment is of no common character, it is not what a worldly man has worn;’489. And in
(the prince’s) heart great joy arose, as he regarded the coat with double reverence,

and forthwith giving all the other things to Kandaka, he himself was clad in it, of Kashâya
colour;490. Then like the dark and lowering cloud, that surrounds the disc of the sun or moon,

he for a moment gazed, scanning his steps (way), then entered on the hermit’s grot;491. Kandaka
following him with (wistful) eyes, his body disappeared, nor was it seen again.

’My lord and master now has left his father’s house, his kinsfolk and myself (he cried),492.
’He now has clothed himself in hermit’s garb, and entered the painful forest;’raising his
hands he called on Heaven, o’erpowered with grief he could not move;493. Till holding by
the white steed’s neck, he tottered forward on the homeward road,

turning again and often looking back, his steps (body) going on, his heart back-hastening,494.
Now lost in thought and self-forgetful, now looking down to earth, then raising up his
drooping (eye) to heaven, falling at times and then rising again, thus weeping as he went,
he pursued his way homewards.

VARGA 7. ENTERING THE PLACE (WOOD) OF AUSTERITIES.

