(for) the prince’s heart is sincere and refined, always actuated with pity and love to men.461.
’To be deeply affected with love, and yet to forsake (the object of love), this surely
is opposed to a constant mind. O then, for pity’s sake! return to your home, and thus appease
my foolish longings.’

462. The prince having listened to Kandaka, pitying his grief expressed in so many words, with
heart resolved and strong in its determination, spoke thus to him once more, and said:

463. ’Why thus on my account do you feel the pain of separation? you should overcome this sorrowful
mood, it is for you to comfort yourself;

464. ’All creatures, each in its way, foolishly arguing that all things are constant, would
influence me to-day not to forsake my kin and relatives;465. ’But when dead and come to be
a ghost, how then, let them say, can I be kept?

My loving mother when she bore me, with deep affection painfully carried me,466. ’And then when
born she died, not permitted to nourish me. One alive, the other dead, gone by different
roads, where now shall she be found?

467. ’Like as in a wilderness on some high tree all the birds living with their mates assemble
in the evening and at dawn disperse, so are the separations of the world;

468. ’The floating clouds rise (like) a high mountain, from the four quarters they fill the
void, in a moment again they are separated and disappear; so is it with the habitations of
men;

469. ’People from the beginning have erred thus, binding themselves in society and by the ties
of love, and then, as after a dream, all is dispersed; do not then recount the names of
my relatives;

470. ’For like the wood which is produced in spring, gradually grows and brings forth its leaves,
which again fall in the autumn-chilly-dews--if the different parts of the same body
are thus divided--471. ’How much more men who are united in society! and how shall the ties
of relationship escape rending?

Cease therefore your grief and expostulation, obey my commands and return home;472. ’The thought
of your return alone will save me, and perhaps after your return I also may come back.

The men of Kapilavastu, hearing that my heart is fixed,473. ’Will dismiss from their minds all
thought of me, but you may make known my words,

"when I have escaped from the sad ocean of birth and death, then afterwards I will come back
again;474. ’"But I am resolved, if I obtain not my quest, my body shall perish in the mountain
wilds."’

The white horse hearing the prince, as he uttered these true and earnest words,475. ’Bent his
knee and licked his foot, whilst he sighed deeply and wept. Then the prince with his soft
and glossy palm, (fondly) stroking the head of the white, horse,

476. (Said), ’Do not let sorrow rise (within), I grieve indeed at losing you, my gallant steed--so
strong and active, your merit now has gained its end;477. ’You shall enjoy for long
a respite from an evil birth,

but for the present take as your reward these precious jewels and this glittering sword, and
with them follow closely after Kandaka.’478. The prince then drawing forth his sword, glancing
in the light as the dragon’s eye,

(cut off) the knot of hair with its jewelled stud, and forthwith cast it into space;479. Ascending
upwards to the firmament, it floated there as the wings of the phoenix

then all the Devas of the Trayastrimsa heavens seizing the hair, returned with it to their heavenly
abodes;480. Desiring always to adore the feet (offer religious service), how much
rather now possessed of the crowning locks, with unfeigned piety do they increase their adoration,
and shall do till the true law has died away.

481. Then the royal prince thought thus, ’My adornments now are gone for ever, there only now
remain these silken garments, which are not in keeping with a hermit’s life.’

482. Then the Deva of the Pure abode, knowing the heart-ponderings of the prince, transformed
himself into a hunter’s likeness, holding his bow, his arrows in his girdle,483. His body
girded with a Kashâya-colour’d robe, thus he advanced in front of the prince.

