but I rejoice to have acquired religious wealth; if you say that I am young and tender, and
that the time for seeking wisdom is not come,440. ’You ought to know that to seek true religion,
there never is a time not fit;

impermanence and fickleness, the hate of death, these ever follow us,441. ’And therefore I (embrace)
the present day, convinced that now is time to seek religion.

With such entreaties as the above, you must make matters plain on my behalf;442. ’But, pray
you cause my father not to think longingly after me;

let him destroy all recollection of me, and cut out from his soul the ties of love;443. ’And
you, grieve not because of what I say, but recollect to give the king my message.’

Kandaka hearing respectfully the words of exhortation, blinded and confused through choking
sorrow,444. With hands outstretched did worship; and answering the prince, he spoke,

’The orders that you give me, will, I fear, add grief to grief;445. ’And sorrow thus increased
will deepen, as the elephant who struggles into deeper mire.

When the ties of love are rudely snapped, who, that has any heart, would not grieve!446. ’The
golden ore may still by stamping be broken up, how much more the feelings choked with sorrow!

the prince has grown up in a palace, with every care bestowed upon his tender person,447. ’And
now he gives his body to the rough and thorny forest; how will he be able to bear a life
of privation?

When first you ordered me to equip your steed, my mind was indeed sorely troubled,448. ’But
the heavenly powers urged me on, causing me to hasten the preparation (of the horse),

but what is the intention that urges the prince, to resolve thus to leave his secure palace?449.
’The people of Kapilavastu, and all the country afflicted with grief;

your father, now an old man, mindful of his son, loving him moreover tenderly;450. ’Surely this
determination to leave your home, this is not according to duty; it is wrong, surely,
to disregard father and mother,--we cannot speak of such a thing with propriety!

451. ’Gotamî, too, who has nourished you so long, fed you with milk when a helpless child, such
love as hers cannot easily be forgotten; it is impossible surely to turn the back on a
benefactor;

452. ’The highly gifted (virtuous) mother of a child, is ever respected by the most distinguished
families; to inherit distinction and then to turn round, is not the mark of a distinguished
man:

453. The illustrious child of Yasodharâ, who has inherited a kingdom, rightly governed, his
years now gradually ripening, should not thus go away from and forsake his home;454. But though
he has gone away from his royal father, and forsaken his family and his kin,

forbid it he should still drive me away, let me not depart from the feet of my master;455. ’My
heart is bound to thee, as the heat is (bound up) in the boiling water;

I cannot return without thee to my country; to return and leave the prince thus, in the midst
of the solitude of the desert,456. ’Then should I be like Sumantra (Sumantra), who left
and forsook Râma;

and now if I return alone to the palace, what words can I address to the king?457. ’How can
I reply to the reproaches of all the dwellers in the palace with suitable words?

Therefore let the prince rather tell me, how I may truly describe,458. ’And with what device,
the disfigured body, and the merit-seeking condition of the hermit!

I am full of fear and alarm, my tongue can utter no words;459. ’Tell me then what words to speak;
but who is there in the empire will believe me?

If I say that the moon’s rays are scorching, there are men, perhaps, who may believe me;460.
’But they will not believe that the prince, in his conduct, will act without piety;

