495. The prince having dismissed Kandaka, as he entered the Rishis’ abode, his graceful body
brightly shining, lit up on every side the forest ’place of suffering;’496. Himself gifted
with every excellence (Siddhârtha), according to his gifts, so were they reflected. As the
lion, the king of beasts, when he enters among the herd of beasts,

497. Drives from their minds all thoughts of common things, as now they watch the true form
of their kind, so those Rishi masters assembled there, suddenly perceiving the miraculous
portent,498. Were struck with awe and fearful gladness, as they gazed with earnest eyes and
hands conjoined.

The men and women too, engaged in various occupations, beholding him, with unchanged attitudes,499.
Gazed as the gods look on king Sakra, with constant look and eyes unmoved; so the
Rishis, with their feet fixed fast, looked at him even thus;

500. Whatever in their hands they held, without releasing it, they stopped and looked; even
as the ox when yoked to the wain, his body bound, his mind also restrained;501. So also the
followers of the holy Rishis, each called the other to behold the miracle.

The peacocks and the other birds with cries commingled flapped their wings;502. The Brahmakârins
holding the rules of deer, following the deer wandering through mountain glades,(as the)
deer coarse of nature, with flashing eyes [shen shih], regard (or see) the prince with
fixed gaze;503. So following the deer, those Brahmakârins intently gaze likewise,

looking at the exceeding glory of the Ikshvâku. As the glory of the rising sun504. Is able to
affect the herds of milch kine, so as to increase the quantity of their sweet-scented milk,

so those Brahmakârins, with wondrous joy, thus spoke one to the other:505. ’Surely this is one
of the eight Vasu Devas;’others, ’this is one of the two Asvins;’ others, ’this is Mâra;’
others, ’this is one of the Brahmakâyikas;’506. Others, ’this is Sûryadeva or Kandradeva,
coming down;

are they not seeking here a sacrifice which is their due? Come let us haste to offer our religious
services!’507. The prince, on his part, with respectful mien addressed to them polite
salutation.

Then Bodhisattva, looking with care in every direction on the Brahmakârins occupying the wood,508.
Each engaged in his religious duties, all desirous of the delights of heaven,

addressed the senior Brahmakârin, and asked him as to the path of true religion.509. ’Now having
but just come here, I do not yet know the rules of your religious life. I ask you therefore
for information, and I pray explain to me what I ask.’

510. On this that twice-born (Brahman) in reply explained in succession all the modes of painful
discipline, and the fruits expected as their result.

511. (How some ate) nothing brought from inhabited places (villages), (but) that produced from
pure water, (others) edible roots and tender twigs, (others) fruits and flowers fit for
food,512. Each according to the rules of his sect, clothing and food in each case different,

some living amongst bird-kind, and like them capturing and eating food;513. Others eating as
the deer the grass (and herbs); others living like serpents, inhaling air;

others eating nothing pounded in wood or stone; some eating with two teeth, till a wound be
formed;514. Others, again, begging their food and giving it in charity, taking only the remnants
for themselves;

others, again, who let water continually drip on their heads and those who offer up with fire;515.
Others who practise water-dwelling like fish; thus there are (he said) Brahmakârins
of every sort,

who practise austerities, that they may at the end of life obtain a birth in heaven,516. And
by their present sufferings afterwards obtain peaceable fruit.

The lord of men, the excellent master, hearing all their modes of sorrow-producing penance,517.
Not perceiving any element of truth in them, experienced no joyful emotion in his heart;
lost in thought, he regarded the men with pity, and with his heart in agreement his mouth
thus spoke:

518. ’Pitiful indeed are such sufferings! and merely in quest of a human or heavenly reward,
ever revolving in the cycle of birth or death, how great your sufferings, how small the recompence!

