630. ’Now,’ she cried, ’my stay and my support is lost, between those once agreed in life (religious
life), separation has sprung up! those who were at one (as to religion) are now divided,
(let go their common action)! where shall I seek another mode of (religious) life?

631. ’In olden days the former conquerors (Ginas?) greatly rejoiced to see their kingly retinue;
these with their wives in company, in search of highest wisdom, roamed through groves
and plains.632. ’And now, that he should have deserted me! and what is the religious state
he seeks!

the Brahman ritual respecting sacrifice, requires the wife to take part in the offering,633.
’And because they both share in the service they shall both receive a common reward hereafter!
but you (O prince!) art niggard in your religious rites, driving me away, and wandering
forth alone!

634. ’Is it that you saw me jealous, and so turned against me! that you now seek some one free
from jealousy! or did you see some other cause to hate me, that you now seek to find a
heaven-born nymph!

635. ’But why should one excelling in every personal grace seek to practise self-denying austerities!
is it that you despise a common lot with me, that variance rises in your breast
against your wife!

636. ’Why does not Rahula fondly repose upon your knee. Alas! alas! unlucky master! full of
grace without, but hard (diamond) at heart!

637. ’The glory and the pride of all your tribe, yet hating those who reverence you! O! can
it be, you have turned your back for good (upon) your little child, scarce able yet to smile!

638. ’My heart is gone! and all my strength! my lord has fled, to wander in the mountains! he
cannot surely thus forget me! he is then but a man of wood or stone.’

639. Thus having spoken, her mind was dulled and darkened, she muttered on, or spoke in wild
mad words, or fancied that she saw strange sights, and sobbing past the power of self-restraint,640.
Her breath grew less, and sinking thus, she fell asleep upon the dusty ground!

The palace ladies seeing this, were wrung with heartfelt sorrow,641. Just as the full-blown
lily, struck by the wind and hail, is broken down and withered.

And now the king, his father, having lost the prince, was filled, both night and day, with grief;642.
And fasting, sought the gods (for help).He prayed that they would soon restore him,
and having prayed and finished sacrifice, he went from out the sacred gates;643. Then
hearing all the cries and sounds of mourning, his mind distressed became confused, as when
heaven’s thundering and lightning put to bewildering flight a herd of elephants.

644. Then seeing Kandaka with the royal steed, after long questioning, finding his son a hermit,
fainting he fell upon the earth, as when the flag of Indra falls and breaks.

645. Then all the ministers of state, upraising him, exhort him, as was right, to calm himself.
After a while, his mind somewhat recovered, speaking to the royal steed, he said:

646. ’How often have I ridden thee to battle, and every time have thought upon (commended) your
excellence! but now I hate and loathe thee, more than ever I have loved or praised thee!

647. ’My son, renowned for noble qualities, thou hast carried off and taken from me; and left
him ’mid the mountain forests; and now you have come back alone;

648. ’Take me, then, quickly hence and go! And going, never more come back with me! For since
you have not brought him back, my life is worth no more preserving;649. ’No longer care
I about governing! My son about me was my only joy;

as the Brahman Gayanta met death for his son’s sake,650. ’So I, deprived of my religious son,
will of myself deprive myself of life.So Manu, lord of all that lives, ever lamented for
his son;651. ’How much more I, a mortal man (ever-man), deprived of mine, must lose all rest!

In old time the king Aga, loving his son, wandering thro’ the mountains,652. ’Lost in thought
(or deeply affected), ended life, and forthwith was born in heaven.

And now I cannot die! Thro’ the long night fixed in this sad state,653. ’With this great palace
round me, thinking of my son, solitary and athirst as any hungry spirit (Preta);as one
who, thirsty, holding water in his hand, but when he tries to drink lets all escape,654.
’And so remains athirst till death ensues, and after death becomes a wandering ghost;--so
I, in the extremity of thirst, through loss, possessed once of a son, but now without a son,655.
’Still live, and cannot end my days!But come! tell me at once where is my son! let
me not die athirst (for want of knowing this) and fall among the Pretas.656. ’In former days,
at least, my will was strong and firm, difficult to move as the great earth; but now I’ve
lost my son, my mind is dazed, as in old time the king "ten chariots."’

