All the body of learned masters from this place have reached heaven;544. ’All the learned Rishis
who have sought religious merit, have from this place and northwards (found it), those
who have attained a knowledge of the true law, and gained divine wisdom come not from southwards;

545. ’If you indeed see us remiss and not earnest enough, practising rules not pure, and on
that account are not pleased to stay,546. ’Then we are the ones that ought to go; you can
still remain and dwell here,

all these different Brahmakârins ever desire to find companions in their penances.547. ’And
you, because you are conspicuous for your religious earnestness, should not so quickly cast
away their society:if you can remain here, they will honour you as god Sakra,548. ’Yea!
as the Devas pay worship to Brihaspati (or, Virudhakapati).’

Then Bodhisattva answered the Brahmakârins and told them what his desires were:549. ’I am seeking
for a true method of escape, I desire solely to destroy all mundane influences;

but you, with strong hearts, practise your rules as ascetics,550. ’And pay respectful attention
to such visitors as may come. My heart indeed is moved with affection towards you,

for pleasant conversation is agreeable to all, those who listen are affected thereby;551. ’And
so hearing your words, my mind is strengthened in religious feeling;

you indeed have all paid me much respect, in agreement with the courtesy of your religious profession;552.
’But now I am constrained to depart, my heart grieves thereat exceedingly,

first of all, having left my own kindred, and now about to be separated from you.553. ’The pain
of separation from associates, this pain is as great as the other, it is impossible for
my mind not to grieve, as it is not to see others’ faults.

554. ’But you, by suffering pain, desire earnestly to obtain the joys of birth in heaven; whilst
I desire to escape from the three worlds, and therefore I give up what my reason (mind)
tells me must be ejected.555. ’The law which you practise, you inherit from the deeds of
former teachers, but I, desiring to destroy all combination (accumulation), seek a law which
admits of no such accident.556. ’And therefore I cannot in this grove delay for a longer
while in fruitless discussions.’

At this time all the Brahmakârins, hearing the words spoken by Bodhisattva,557. Words full of
right reason and truth, very excellent in the distinction of principles, their hearts rejoiced
and exulted greatly, and deep feelings of reverence were excited within them.

558. At this time there was one Brahmakârin, who always slept in the dust, with tangled hair
and raiment of the bark of trees, his eyes bleared (yellow), preparing himself in an ascetic
practice (called) ’high-nose.’

559. This one addressed Bodhisattva in the following words: ’Strong in will! bright in wisdom!
firmly fixed in resolve to escape (pass beyond) the limits of birth, knowing that in escape
from birth there alone is rest,560. ’Not affected by any desire after heavenly blessedness,
the mind set upon, the eternal destruction of the body (bodily form), you are indeed
miraculous in appearance, (as you are) alone in the possession of such a mind.561. ’To sacrifice
to the gods, and to practise every kind of austerity, all this is designed to secure
a birth in heaven, but here there is no mortification of selfish desire,562. ’There is
still a selfish personal aim; but to bend the will to seek final escape, this is indeed the
work of a true teacher, this is the aim of an enlightened master;

563. ’This place is no right halting-place for you, you ought to proceed to Mount Pinda (Pândava),
there dwells a great Muni, whose name is A-lo-lam (Arâda Râma).

564. ’He only has reached the end (of religious aims), the most excellent eye (of the law).
Go therefore to the place where he dwells, and listen there to the true exposition of the
law.

565. ’This will make your heart rejoice, as you learn to follow the precepts of his system.
As for me, beholding the joy of your resolve, and fearing that I shall not obtain rest,566.
’I must once more let go (dismiss) those following me, and seek other disciples;

straighten my head (nose) and gaze with my full eyes; anoint my lips and cleanse my teeth,567.
’Cover my shoulders and make bright my face, smooth my tongue and make it pliable. Thus,
O excellently marked, sir! fully drinking (at the fountain of) the water you give (glorious
water),

568. ’I shall escape from the unfathomable depths. In the world nought is comparable to this,
that which old men and Rishis have not known, that shall (I) know and obtain:

569. Bodhisattva having listened to these words, left the company of the Rishis, whilst they
all, turning round him to the right, returned to their place.

VARGA 8. THE GENERAL GRIEF OF THE PALACE.

