519. ’Leaving your friends, giving up honourable position; with a firm purpose to obtain the
joys of heaven, although you may escape little sorrows, yet in the end involved in great
sorrow;

520. ’Promoting the destruction of your outward form, and undergoing every kind of painful penance,
and yet seeking to obtain another birth; increasing and prolonging the causes of the
five desires,521. ’Not considering that herefrom (result repeated) birth and death, undergoing
suffering and, by that, seeking further suffering;

thus it is that the world of men, though dreading the approach of death,522. ’Yet strive after
renewed birth; and being thus born, they must die again. Altho’ still dreading (the power
of) suffering, yet prolonging their stay in the sea of pain:

523. ’Disliking from their heart their present kind of life, yet still striving incessantly
after other life; enduring affliction that they may partake of joy; seeking a birth in heaven,
to suffer further trouble;524. ’Seeking joys, whilst the heart sinks with feebleness.
For this is so with those who oppose right reason;

they cannot but be cramped and poor at heart. But by earnestness and diligence, then we conquer.525.
’Walking in the path of true wisdom, letting go both extremes, we then reach ultimate
perfection;

to mortify the body, (if) this is religion, then to enjoy rest, is something not resulting from
religion.526. ’To walk religiously and afterwards to receive happiness, this is to make
the fruit of religion something different from religion;

but bodily exercise is but the cause of death, strength results alone from the mind’s intention;527.
’If you remove (from conduct) the purpose of the mind, the bodily act is but as rotten
wood; wherefore, regulate the mind, and then the body will spontaneously go right.

528. ’(You say that) to eat pure things is a cause of religious merit, but the wild beasts and
the children of poverty ever feed on these fruits and medicinal herbs; these then ought
to gain much religious merit.

529. ’But if you say that the heart being good then bodily suffering is the cause of further
merit, (then I ask) why may not those who walk (live) in ease, also possess a virtuous heart?530.
’If joys are opposed to a virtuous heart, a virtuous heart may also be opposed to
bodily suffering;

if, for instance, all those heretics profess purity because they use water (in various ways),531.
’Then those who thus use water among men, even with a wicked mind (karma), yet ought
ever to be pure.

But if righteousness is the groundwork of a Rishi’s purity, then the idea of a sacred spot as
his dwelling,532. ’Being the cause of his righteousness (is wrong). What is reverenced,
should be known and seen. Reverence indeed is due to righteous conduct, but let it not redound
to the place (or, mode of life).’

533. Thus speaking at large on religious questions, they went on till the setting sun. He then
beheld their rites in connection with sacrifice to fire, the drilling (for sparks) and
the fanning into flame,534. Also the sprinkling of the butter libations, also the chanting
of the mystic prayers, till the sun went down.

The prince considering these acts,535. Could not perceive the right reason of them, and was
now desirous to turn and go.

Then all those Brahmakârins came together to him to request him to stay;536. Regarding with
reverence the dignity of Bodhisattva, very desirous, they earnestly besought him:

’You have come from an irreligious place, to this wood where true religion flourishes,537. ’And
yet, now, you wish to go away; we beg you, then, on this account, to stay.’

All the old Brahmakârins, with their twisted hair and bark clothes,538. Came following after
Bodhisattva, asking him as a god to stay a little while.

Bodhisattva seeing these aged ones following him, their bodies worn with macerations,539. Stood
still and rested beneath a tree; and soothing them, urged them to return. Then all the
Brahmakârins, young and old, surrounding him, made their request with joined hands:

540. ’You who have so unexpectedly arrived here, amid these garden glades so full of attraction,
why now are you leaving them and going away, to seek perfection in the wilderness?

541. ’As a man loving (long) life, is unwilling to let go his body, so we are even thus; would
that you would stop awhile.

542. ’This is a spot where Brahmans and Rishis have ever dwelt, royal Rishis and heavenly Rishis,
these all have dwelt within these woods. The places on the borders of the snowy mountains,543.
’Where men of high birth undergo their penance, those places are not to be compared
to this.

