their ornaments all thrown aside, disconsolate and sad, cheerless in face,594. Raised their
bodies, without any grace, even as the feeble (little) morning star (or stars of morning);
their garments torn and knotted, soiled like the appearance of a robber,

595. Seeing Kandaka and the royal horse shedding tears instead of the hoped-for return, they
all, assembled thus, uttered their cry, even as those who weep for one beloved just dead;596.
Confused and wildly they rushed about, as a herd of oxen that have lost their way.

Mahâpragâpati Gôtamî, hearing that the prince had not returned,597. Fell fainting on the ground,
her limbs entirely deprived of strength,even as some mad tornado wind crushes the golden-colour’d
plantain tree;598. And again, hearing that her son had become a recluse, deeply
sighing and with increased sadness she thought,’Alas! those glossy locks turning to the
right, each hair produced from each orifice,599. ’Dark and pure, gracefully shining, sweeping
the earth when loose, or when so determined, bound together in a heavenly crown, and
now shorn and lying in the grass!600. ’Those rounded shoulders and that lion step! Those eyes
broad as the ox-king’s, that body shining bright as yellow gold; that square breast and
Brahma voice;601. ’That you! possessing all these excellent qualities, should have entered
on the sorrow-giving forest; what fortune now remains for the world, losing thus the holy
king of earth?602. ’That those delicate and pliant feet, pure as the lily and of the same
colour, should now be torn by stones and thorns; O how can such feet tread on such ground!603.
’Born and nourished in the guarded palace, clad with garments of the finest texture,
washed in richly-scented water, anointed with the choicest perfumes,604. ’And now exposed
to chilling blasts and dews of night, O! where during the heat or the chilly morn can rest
be found!Thou flower of all thy race! Confessed by all the most renowned!605. ’Thy virtuous
qualities everywhere talked of and exalted, ever reverenced, without self-seeking! why
hast thou unexpectedly brought thyself upon some morn to beg thy food for life!606. ’Thou
who wert wont to repose upon a soft and kingly couch, and indulge in every pleasure during
thy waking hours, how canst thou now endure the mountain and the forest wilds, on the
bare grass to make thyself a resting-place!’607. Thus thinking of her son--her heart was full
of sorrow, disconsolate she lay upon the earth. The waiting women raised her up, and dried
the tears from off her face,

608. Whilst all the other courtly ladies, overpowered with grief, their limbs relaxed, their
minds bound fast with woe, unmoved they sat like pictured-folk.

609. And now Yasodharâ deeply chiding, spoke thus to Kandaka: ’Where now dwells he, who ever
dwells within my mind?610. ’You two went forth, the horse a third, but now two only have
returned!

My heart is utterly o’er-borne with grief, filled with anxious thoughts, it cannot rest.611.
’And you deceitful man! Untrustworthy and false associate!

evil contriver! plainly revealed a traitor, a smile lurks underneath thy tears!612. ’Escorting
him in going; returning now with wails!

Not one at heart--but in league against him--openly constituted a friend and well-wisher, concealing
underneath a treacherous purpose;613. ’So thou hast caused the sacred prince to go
forth once and not return again!

No questioning the joy you feel! Having done ill you now enjoy the fruit;614. ’Better far to
dwell with an enemy of wisdom, than work with one who, while a fool, professes friendship.

Openly professing sweetness and light, inwardly a scheming and destructive enemy.615. ’And now
this royal and kingly house, in one short morn is crushed and ruined!All these fair and
queen-like women, with grief o’erwhelmed, their beauty marred,616. ’Their breathing choked
with tears and sobs, their faces soiled with crossing tracks of grief!Even the queen (Mâyâ)
when in life, resting herself on him, as the great snowy mountains617. ’Repose upon the
widening earth, through grief in thought of What would happen, died.

How sad the lot of these--within these open lattices--these weeping ones, these deeply wailing!618.
’Born in another state than hers in heaven, how can their grief be borne!’

Then speaking to the horse she said, ’Thou unjust! what dullness this--to carry off a man,619.
’As in the darkness some wicked thief bears off a precious gem.

When riding thee in time of battle, swords, and javelins and arrows,620. ’None of these alarmed
or frighted thee! But now what fitfulness of temper this,to carry off by violence, to
rob my soul of one, the choicest jewel of his tribe.621. ’O! thou art but a vicious reptile,
to do such wickedness as this!

to-day thy woeful lamentation sounds everywhere within these palace walls,622. ’But when you
stole away my cherished one, why wert thou dumb and silent then!

