777. The royal prince departing from the court-master (i.e. the Purohita) and the great minister,
Saddharma, keeping along the stream, then crossing the Ganges, he took the road towards
the Vulture Peak,

778. Hidden among the five mountains, standing alone a lovely peak as a roof amid (the others).
The trees and shrubs and flowers in bloom, the flowing fountains, and the cooling rills,779.
(All these he gazed upon)--then passing on, he entered the city of the five peaks,
calm and peaceful, as one come down from heaven.

The country folk, seeing the royal prince, his comeliness and his excessive grace,780. Though
young in years, yet glorious in his person, incomparable as the appearance of a great master,
seeing him thus, strange thoughts affected them, as if they gazed upon the banner (curtain)
of Isvara.

781. They stayed the foot, who passed athwart the path; those hastened on, who were behind.;
those going before, turned back their heads and gazed with earnest, wistful look.

782. The marks and distinguishing points of his person, on these they fixed their eyes without
fatigue, and then approached with reverent homage, joining both their hands in salutation:

783. With all there was a sense of wondrous joy, as in their several ways they offered what
they had, looking at his noble and illustrious features; bending down their bodies modestly,

784. Correcting every careless or unseemly gesture, thus they showed their reverence to him
silently; those who with anxious heart, seeking release, were moved by love, with feelings
composed bowed down the more.

785. Great men and women, in their several engagements, at the same time arrested on their way,
paid to his person and his presence homage: and following him as they gazed, they went
not back.

786. For the white circle between his eyebrows adorning his wide and violet colour’d eyes, his
noble body bright as gold, his pure and web-joined fingers,787. All these, though he were
but a hermit, were marks of one who was a holy king;

and now the men and women of Râgagriha, the old and young alike, were moved,788. (And cried),
’This man so noble as a recluse, what common joy is this for us.’

At this time Bimbasâra Râga, placed upon a high tower of observation,789. Seeing all those men
and women, in different ways exhibiting one mark of surprise, calling before him some man
outside, enquired at once the cause of it;790. This one bending his knee below the tower,
told fully what he had seen and heard,’That one of the Sâkya race, renowned of old, a prince
most excellent and wonderful,791. ’Divinely wise, beyond the way of this world, a fitting
king to rule the eight regions, now without home, is here, and all men are paying homage
to him.’

792. The king on hearing this was deeply moved at heart, and though his body was restrained,
his soul had gone. Calling his ministers speedily before him, and all his nobles and attendants,793.
He bade them follow secretly the (prince’s) steps, to observe what charity was
given.

(So in obedience to the command) they followed and watched him steadfastly, as with even gait
and unmoved presence794. He entered on the town and begged his food, according to the rule
of all great hermits,

with joyful mien and undisturbed mind, not anxious whether much or little alms were given;795.
Whatever he received, costly or poor, he placed within his bowl, then turned back to the
wood, and having eaten it and drank of the flowing stream, he joyous sat upon the immaculate
mountain.

796. (There he beheld) the green trees fringing with their shade the crags, the scented flowers
growing between the intervals, whilst the peacocks and the other birds, joyously flying,
mingled their notes;

797. His sacred garments bright and lustrous, (shone) as the sun-lit mulberry leaves; the messengers
beholding his fixed composure, one by one (returning), reported what they had seen;

798. The king hearing it, was moved at heart, and forthwith ordered his royal equipment to be
brought, his god-like crown and his flower-bespangled robes; then, as the lion-king, he
strided forth,

799. And choosing certain aged persons of consideration, learned men, able calmly and wisely
to discriminate, he (with them) led the way followed by a hundred thousand people, who like
a cloud ascended with the king the royal mountain.

800. And now beholding the dignity of Bodhisattva, every outward gesture (spring of action)
under government, sitting with ease upon the mountain crag, as the moon shining limpid in
the pure heavens,801. So (was) his matchless beauty and purity of grace; then as the converting
presence of religion

dwelling within the heart makes it reverential, so (beholding him) he reverently approached,802.
Even as divine Sâkara comes to the presence of Mo-hi-su-ma,

