so with every outward form of courtesy and reverence (the king approached) and asked him respectfully
of his welfare.803. Bodhisattva, answering as he was moved, in his turn made similar
enquiries.

Then the king, the questioning over, sat down with dignity upon a clean-faced rock.804. And
so he steadfastly beheld the divine appearance (of the prince),

the sweetness and complacency of his features revealing what his station was and high estate,
his family renown, received by inheritance,805. The king who for a time restrained his feelings,
now wishful to get rid of doubts,

(enquired) (why one) descended from the royal family of the sun-brightness having attended to
religious sacrifices thro’ ten thousand generations,806. Whereof the virtue had descended
as his full inheritance, increasing and accumulating until now, (why he) so excellent in
wisdom, so young in years, had now become a recluse,

807. Rejecting the position of a Kakravartin’s son, begging his food, despising family fame,
his beauteous form, fit for perfumes and anointings, why clothed with coarse Kasâya garments;808.
The hand which ought to grasp the reins of empire, instead thereof, taking its little
stint of food;if indeed (the king continued) you were not of royal descent, and would
receive as an offering the transfer of this land,809. Then would I divide with you my empire;

saying this, he scarcely hoped to excite his feelings, who had left his home and family, to
be a hermit. Then forthwith the king proceeded thus:810. ’Give just weight I pray you to my
truthful words, desire for power is kin to nobleness,

and so is just pride of fame or family or wealth or personal appearance;811. ’No longer having
any wish to subdue the proud, or to bend (others) down and so get thanks from men, it were
better, then, to give to the strong and warlike martial arms to wear, for them to follow
war and by their power to get supremacy;

812. ’But when by one’s own power a kingdom falls to hand, who would not then accept the reins
of empire? The wise man knows the time to take religion, wealth, and worldly pleasure.

813. ’But if he obtains not the three (or, threefold profit), then in the end he abates his
earnest efforts, and reverencing religion, he lets go material wealth. Wealth is the one desire
of worldly men;

814. ’To be rich and lose all desire for religion, this is to gain but outside wealth. But to
be poor and even thus despise religion, what pleasure can indulgence give in such a case!

815. ’But when possessed of all the three, and when enjoyed with reason and propriety, then
religion, wealth, and pleasure make what is rightly called a great master;816. ’Permit not,
then, your perfectly-endowed body to lay aside (sacrifice) its glory, without reward (merit);Mandha(ri)
the Kakravartin, as a monarch, ruled the four empires of the world,817. ’And
shared with Sakra his royal throne, but was unequal to the task of ruling heaven. But you,
with your redoubtable strength, may well grasp both heavenly and human power;

818. ’I do not rely upon my kingly power, in my desire to keep you here by force, but seeing
you change your comeliness of person, and wearing the hermit’s garb,

819. ’Whilst it makes me reverence you for your virtue, moves me with pity and regret for you
as a man; you now go begging your food, and I offer you (desire to offer) the whole land
as yours;

820. ’Whilst you are young and lusty enjoy yourself. During middle life acquire wealth, and
when old and all your abilities ripened, then is the time for following the rules of religion;

821. ’When young to encourage religious fervour, is to destroy the sources of desire; but when
old and the breath (of desire) is less eager, then is the time to seek religious solitude;822.
’When old we should avoid, as a shame, desire of wealth, but get honour in the world
by a religious life;

but when young, and the heart light and elastic, then is the time to partake of pleasure,823.
’In boon companionship to indulge in gaiety, and partake to the full of mutual intercourse;

but as-years creep on, giving up indulgence, to observe the ordinances of religion,824. ’To
mortify the five desires, and go on increasing a joyful and religious heart,

is not this the law of the eminent kings of old, who as a great company paid worship to heaven,825.
’And borne on the dragon’s back, received the joys of celestial abodes?

All these divine and victorious monarchs, glorious in person, richly adorned,826. ’Thus having
as a company performed their religious offering, in the end received the reward of their
conduct in heaven.’

