881. ’And so through all the eightfold laws of the world they possess no marks of permanence,
sorrow and joy cannot agree together, as a person slave-governed loses his renown.

882. ’But religion causes all things to be of service, as a king reigning in his sovereignty;
so religion controls sorrow, as one fits on a burthen according to power of endurance.883.
’Whatever our condition in the world, still sorrows accumulate around us.

Even in the condition of a king, how does pain multiply, though bound to others by love, yet
this is a cause of grief;884. ’Without friends and living alone, what joy can there be in
this?

Though a man rules over the four kingdoms, yet only one part can be enjoyed;885. ’To be concerned
in ten thousand matters, what profit is there in this, for we only accumulate anxieties.

Put an end to sorrow, then, by appeasing desire, refrain from busy work, this is rest.886. ’A
king enjoys his sensual pleasures; deprived of kingship there is the joy of rest; in both
cases there are pleasures (but of different kinds); why then be a king!

887. ’Make then no plan or crafty expedient, to lead me back to the five desires; what my heart
prays for, is some quiet place and freedom (a free road);888. ’But you desire to entangle
me in relationships and duties, and destroy the completion of what I seek;

I am in no fear of a hated house (family hatred), nor do I seek the joys of heaven;889. ’My
heart hankers after no vulgar profit, so I have put away my royal diadem; and contrary to
your way of thinking, I prefer, henceforth, no more to rule.

890. ’A hare rescued from the serpent’s mouth, would it go back again to be devoured? holding
a torch and burning himself, would not a man let it go?

891. ’A man blind. and recovering his sight, would he again seek to be in darkness? the rich,
does he sigh for poverty? the wise, does he long to be ignorant?892. ’Has the world such
men as these? then will I again enjoy my country.

(But) I desire to get rid of birth, old age, and death, with body restrained, to beg my food;893.
’With appetites moderated, to keep in my retreat; and then to avoid the evil modes of
a future life, this is to find peace in two worlds: now then I pray you pity me not.

894. ’Pity, rather, those who rule as kings! their souls ever vacant and athirst, in the present
world no repose, hereafter receiving pain as their meed.

895. ’You, who possess a distinguished family name, and the reverence due to a great master,
would generously share your dignity with me, your worldly pleasures and amusements;896. ’I,
too, in return, for your sake, beseech you to share my reward with me;

he who indulges in (practises) the threefold kinds of pleasure, this man the world calls "Lord,"897.
’But this is not according to reason either, because these things cannot be retained,
but where there is no birth, or life, or death, he who exercises himself in this way,
is Lord indeed!

