898. ’You say that while young a man should be gay, and when old then religious (a recluse),
but I regard the feebleness of age as bringing with it loss of power (to be religious),899.
’Unlike the firmness and power of youth, the will determined and the heart established;

but death as a robber with a drawn sword follows us all, desiring to catch his prey;900. ’How
then should we wait for old age, ere we bring our mind to a religious life?

Inconstancy is the great hunter, age his bow, disease his arrows,901. ’In the fields of life
and death he hunts for living things as for the deer; when he can get his opportunity, he
takes our life; who then would wait for age?

902. ’And what the teachers say and do, with reference to matters connected with life and death,
exhorting the young, mature, or middle-aged, all to contrive by any means,

903. ’To prepare vast meetings for sacrifices, this they do indeed of their own ignorance; better
far to reverence the true law (religion), and put an end to sacrifice to appease the
gods!904. ’Destroying life to gain religious merit, what love can such a man possess?

even if the reward of such sacrifices were lasting, even for this, slaughter would be unseemly;905.
’How much more, when the reward is transient! Shall we (in search of this) slay that
which lives, in worship?

this is like those who practise wisdom, and the way of religious abstraction, but neglect the
rules of moral conduct.906. ’It ill behoves us then to follow with the world, and attend
these sacrificial assemblies,

and seek some present good in killing that which lives; the wise avoid destroying life!907.
’Much less do they engage in general sacrifices, for the purpose of gaining future reward!the
fruit (reward) promised in the three worlds is none of mine to choose for happiness!908.
’All these are governed by transient, fickle laws, like the wind, or the drop that is blown
from the grass;

such things therefore I put away from me, and I seek for true escape.909. ’I hear there is one
O-lo-lam (Arâda Kâlâma) who eloquently (well) discourses on the way of escape,I must go
to the place where he dwells, that great Rishi and hermit.910. ’But in truth, sorrow must
be banished; I regret indeed leaving you;

may your country have repose and quiet! safely defended (by you) as (by) the divine Sakra-râga!911.
’May wisdom be shed abroad as light upon your empire, like the brightness of the meridian
sun!may you be exceedingly victorious as lord of the great earth, with a perfect heart
ruling over its destiny!912. ’May you direct and defend its sons! ruling your empire
in righteousness!

Water and snow and fire are opposed to one another, but the fire by its influence causes vapour,913.
’The vapour causes the floating clouds, the floating clouds drop down rain; there
are birds in space, who drink the rain, with rainless bodies(?)914. ’Slaughter and peaceful
homes are enemies! those who would have peace hate slaughter, and if those who slaughter
are so hateful, then put an end, O king, to those who practise it!915. ’And bid these find
release, as those who drink and yet are parched with thirst.’

Then the king clasping together his hands, with greatest reverence and joyful heart,916. (Said),
’That which you now seek, may you obtain quickly the fruit thereof; having obtained the
perfect fruit, return I pray and graciously receive me!’

917. Bodhisattva, his heart inwardly acquiescing, purposing to accomplish his prayer, departing,
pursued his road, going to the place where Arâda Kâlâma dwelt,918. Whilst the king with
all his retinue, their hands clasped, themselves followed a little space, then with thoughtful
and mindful heart, returned once more to Râgagriha!

VARGA 12. VISIT TO ARÂDA UDRARÂMA.

