827. Bimbasâra Râga having, in a decorous manner, and with soothing speech, made his request,
the prince on his part respectfully replied, in the following words, deep and heart-stirring:

828. ’Illustrious and world renowned! Your words are not opposed to reason, descendant of a
distinguished family--an Aryan--amongst men a true friend indeed,829. ’Righteous and sincere
to the bottom of your heart, it is proper for religion’s sake to speak thus.

In all the world, in its different sections, there is no chartered place for solid virtue (right
principles),830. ’For if virtue flags and folly rules, what reverence can there be,

or honour paid, to a high name or boast of prowess, inherited from former generations!831. ’And
so there may be in the midst of great distress, large goodness, these are not mutually
opposed. This then is so with the world in the connection of true worth and friendship.

832. ’A true friend who makes good (free) use of wealth--is rightly called a fast and firm treasure,
but he who guards and stints the profit he has made, his wealth will soon be spent
and lost;

833. ’The wealth of a country is no constant treasure, but that which is given in charity is
rich in returns, therefore charity is a true friend, altho’ it scatters, yet it brings no
repentance;834. ’You indeed are known as liberal and kind, I make no reply in opposition
to you, but simply as we meet, so with agreeable purpose we talk.

835. ’I fear birth, old age, disease, and death, and so I seek to find a sure mode of deliverance;
I have put away thought of relatives and family affection, how is it possible then
for me to return to the world (five desires)

836. ’And not to fear to revive the poisonous snake, (and after) the hail to be burned in the
fierce fire; indeed I fear the objects of these several desires, this whirling in the stream
(of life) troubles my heart,

837. ’These five desires, the inconstant thieves--stealing from men their choicest treasures,
making them unreal, false, and fickle--are like the man called up as an apparition;838.
’For a time the beholders are affected (by it), but it has no lasting hold upon the mind;

so these five desires are the great obstacles, for ever disarranging the way of peace;839. ’If
the joys of heaven are not worth having,

how much less the desires common to men, begetting the thirst of wild love, and then lost in
the enjoyment,840. ’As the fierce wind fans the fire, till the fuel be spent and the fire
expires;of all unrighteous things in the world, there is nothing worse than the domain of
the five desires;841. ’For all men maddened by the power of lust, giving themselves to pleasure,
are dead to reason. The wise man fears these desires, he fears to fall. into the way
of unrighteousness;

842. ’For like a king who rules all within the four seas, yet still seeks beyond for something
more, (so is lust); like the unbounded ocean, it knows not when and where to stop.

843. ’Mandha, the Kakravartin, when the heavens rained yellow gold, and he ruled all within
the seas, yet sighed after the domain of the thirty-three heavens;844. ’Dividing with Sakra
his seat, and so thro’ the power of this lust he died;

Nung-Sha (Nyâsa?), whilst practising austerities, got power to rule the thirty-three heavenly
abodes,845. ’But from lust he became proud and supercilious, the Rishi whilst stepping into
his chariot, through carelessness in his gait, fell down into the midst of the serpent
pit.

846. ’Yen-lo (Yama?) the universal monarch (Kakravartin) wandering abroad thro’ the Trayastrimsas
heaven, took a heavenly woman (Apsara) for a queen, and unjustly extorted the gold of
a Rishi;847. ’The Rishi, in anger, added a charm, by which the country was ruined, and his
life ended.

Po-lo, and Sakra king of Devas, Sakra king of Devas, and Nung-sha (Nyâsa),848. ’Nung-sha returning
(or, restoring) to Sakra; what certainty (constancy) is there, even for the lord of
heaven? Neither is any country safe, though kept by the mighty strength of those dwelling
in it.

849. ’But when one’s clothing consists of grass, the berries one’s food, the rivulets one’s
drink, with long hair flowing to the ground, silent as a Muni, seeking nothing,

850. ’In this way practising austerities, in the end lust shall be destroyed. Know then, that
the province (indulgence) of the five desires is avowedly an enemy of the religious man.

851. ’Even the one-thousand-armed invincible king, strong in his might, finds it hard to conquer
this. The Rishi Râma perished because of lust,

852. ’How much more ought I, the son of a Kshatriya, to restrain lustful desire; but indulge
in lust a little, and like the child it grows apace,853. ’The wise man hates it therefore;
who would take poison for food?

