every sorrow is increased and cherished by the offices of lust.854. ’If there is no lustful
desire, the risings of sorrow are not produced, the wise man seeing the bitterness of sorrow,
stamps out and destroys the risings of desire;

855. ’That which the world calls virtue, is but another form of this baneful law; worldly men
enjoying the pleasure of covetous desire then every form of careless conduct results;856.
’These careless ways producing hurt, at death, the subject of them reaps perdition (falls
into one of the evil ways).

But by the diligent use of means, and careful continuance therein,857. The consequences of negligence
are avoided, we should therefore dread the non-use of means; recollecting that all
things are illusory, the wise man covets them not;

858. ’He who desires such things, desires sorrow, and then goes on again ensnared in love, with
no certainty of ultimate freedom; he advances still and ever adds grief to grief,859.
Like one holding a lighted torch burns his hand, and therefore the wise man enters on no such
things.

The foolish man and the one who doubts, still encouraging the covetous and burning heart,860.
’In the end receives accumulated sorrow, not to be remedied by any prospect of rest; covetousness
and anger are as the serpent’s poison; the wise man casts away

861. ’The approach of sorrow as a rotten bone; he tastes it not nor touches it, lest it should
corrupt his teeth, that which the wise man will not take,

862. ’The king will go through fire and water to obtain, the wicked sons labour for wealth as
for a piece of putrid flesh, o’er which the hungry flocks of birds contend.863. ’So should
we regard riches; the wise man is ill pleased at having wealth stored up,

the mind wild with anxious thoughts,864. ’Guarding himself by night and day, as .a man who fears
some powerful enemy,

like as a man’s feelings revolt with disgust at the (sights seen) beneath the slaughter post
of the East Market,865. ’So the high post which marks the presence of lust, and anger, and
ignorance, the wise man always avoids;

as those who enter the mountains or the seas have much to contend with and little rest,866.
’As the fruit which grows on a high tree, and is grasped at by the covetous at the risk of
life, so is the region (matter) of covetous desire, tho’ they see the difficulty of getting
it,867. ’Yet how painfully do men scheme after wealth, difficult to acquire, easy to dissipate,
as that which is got in a dream, how can the wise man hoard up (such trash)!868.
’Like covering over with a false surface a hole full of fire, slipping thro’ which the body
is burnt, so is the fire of covetous desire. The wise man meddles not with it.

869. ’Like that Kaurava [Kau-to-po], or Pih-se-ni Nanda, or Ni-k’he-lai Danta, as some kandala’s
(butcher’s) appearance,870. ’Such also is the appearance of lustful desire; the wise
man will have nothing to do with it,he would rather throw his body into the water or fire,
or cast himself down over a steep precipice.871. ’Seeking to obtain heavenly pleasures, what
is this but to remove the place of sorrow, without profit.

Sün-tau, Po-sun-tau (Sundara and Vasundara), brothers of Asura,872. ’Lived together in great
affection, but on account of lustful desire slew one another, and their name perished; all
this then comes from lust;

873. ’It is this which makes a man vile, and lashes and goads him with piercing sorrow; lust
debases a man, robs him of all hope, whilst through the long night his body and soul are
worn out;

874. ’Like the stag that covets the power of speech and dies, or the winged bird that covets
sensual pleasure (the net), or the fish that covets the baited hook, such are the calamities
that lust brings;

875. ’Considering what are the requirements of life, none of these possess permanency; we eat
to appease the pain of hunger, to do away with thirst we drink,

876. ’We clothe ourselves to keep out the cold and wind, we lie down to rest to get sleep, to
procure locomotion we seek a carriage, when we would halt we seek a seat,877. ’We wash to
cleanse ourselves from dirt, all these things are done to avoid inconvenience;

we may gather therefore that these five desires have no permanent character;878. ’For as a man
suffering from fever seeks and asks for some cooling medicine, so covetousness seeks for
something to satisfy its longings;

foolish men regard these things as permanent,879. ’And as the necessary requirements of life,
but, in sooth, there is no permanent cessation of sorrow; for by coveting to appease these
desires we really increase them, there is no character of permanency therefore about them.

880. ’To be filled and clothed are no lasting pleasures, time passes, and the sorrow recurs;
summer is cool during the moon-tide shining; winter comes and cold increases;

