1036. The great Rishi, of the royal tribe of Rishis, beneath the Bodhi tree firmly established,
resolved by oath to perfect the way of complete deliverance.1037. The spirits, Nâgas,
and the heavenly multitude, all were filled with joy; but Mâra Devarâga, enemy of religion,
alone was grieved, and rejoiced not;

1038. Lord of the five desires, skilled in all the arts of warfare, the foe of those who seek
deliverance, therefore his name is rightly given Pisuna.

1039. Now this Mâra râga had three daughters, mincingly beautiful and of a pleasant countenance,
in every way fit by artful ways to enflame a man with love, highest in this respect among
the Devîs.1040. The first was named Yuh-yen (lust-pollution), the second Neng-yueh-gin
(able to delight a man), the third Ngai-loh (love joy). These three, at this time, advanced
together,1041. And addressed their father Pisuna and said: ’May we not know the trouble
that afflicts you?’

The father calming his feelings, addressed his daughters thus:1042. ’The world has now a great
Muni, he has taken a strong oath as a helmet, he holds a mighty bow in his hand, wisdom
is the diamond shaft he uses,

1043. ’His object is to get the mastery in the world, to ruin and destroy my territory (domain);
I am myself unequal to him, for all men will believe in him,1044. ’And all find refuge
in the way of his salvation; then will my land be desert and unoccupied.

But as when a man transgresses the laws of morality, his body (or, he himself) is then empty
(i.e. unprotected),1045. ’So now, the eye of wisdom, not yet opened (in this man), whilst
my empire still has peace (quiet), I will go and overturn his purpose, and break down and
divide the ridge-pole (of his house).’

1046. Seizing then his bow and his five arrows, with all his retinue of male and female attendants,
he went to that grove of ’fortunate rest’ with the vow that the world (all flesh)
should not find peace.

1047. Then seeing the Muni, quiet and still (silent), preparing to cross the sea of the three
worlds, in his left hand grasping his bow, with his right hand pointing his arrow,

1048. He addressed Bodhisattva and said: ’Kshatriya! rise up quickly! for you may well fear!
your death is at hand; you may practise your own religious system,

1049. ’But let go this effort after the law of deliverance (for others); wage warfare in the
field of charity as a cause of merit, appease the tumultuous world, and so in the end reach
your reward in heaven;1050. ’This is a way renowned and well established, in which former
saints (victors) have walked, Rishis and kings and men of eminence; but this system of
penury and alms-begging is unworthy of you.

1051. ’Now then if you rise not, you had best consider with yourself, that if you give not up
your vow, and tempt me to let fly an arrow,

1052. ’How that Aila, grandchild of Soma, by one of these arrows just touched, as by a fanning
of the wind, lost his reason and became a madman;

1053. ’And how the Rishi Vimala, practising austerities, hearing the sound of one of these darts,
his heart possessed by great fear, bewildered and darkened he lost his true nature;

1054. ’How much less can you--a late-born one--hope to escape this dart of mine. Quickly arise
then! if hardly you may get away!

1055. ’This arrow full of rankling poison, fearfully insidious where it strikes a foe! See now!
with all my force, I point it! and are you resting in the face of such calamity?1056.
’How is it that you fear not this dread arrow? say! why do you not tremble?’

Mâra uttered such fear-inspiring threats, bent on overawing Bodhisattva.1057. But Bodhisattva’s
heart remained unmoved; no doubt, no fear was present.

Then Mâra instantly discharged his arrow, whilst the three women came in front;1058. Bodhisattva
regarded not the arrow, nor considered ought the women three.Mâra râga now was troubled
much with doubt, and muttered thus ’twixt heart and mouth:1059. ’Long since the maiden
of the snowy mountains, shooting at Mahesvara, constrained him to change his mind; and yet
Bodhisattva is unmoved,

1060. ’And heeds not even this dart of mine, nor the three heavenly women! nought prevails to
move his heart or raise one spark of love within him.1061. ’Now must I assemble my army-host,
and press him sore by force;’having thought thus awhile, Mâra’s army suddenly assembled
round;1062. Each (severally) assumed his own peculiar form; some were holding spears,
others grasping swords, others snatching up trees, others wielding diamond maces; (thus were
they) armed with every sort of weapon;

1063. Some had heads like hogs, others like fishes, others like asses, others like horses; some
with forms like snakes or like the ox or savage tiger; lion-headed, dragon-headed, (and
like) every other kind of beast;

1064. Some had many heads on one body-trunk, with faces having but a single eye, and then again
with many eyes; some with great-bellied mighty bodies,

