The world without instruction, poisoned by lust and hate and ignorance,1095. ’Because he pitied
"flesh," so circumstanced, he sought on their account the joy of wisdom. Why then would
you molest and hinder one who seeks to banish sorrow from the world?

1096. ’The ignorance that everywhere prevails is due to false pernicious books (sûtras), and
therefore Bodhisattva, walking uprightly, would lead and draw men after him.1097. ’To obscure
and blind the great world-leader, this undertaking is impossible, for ’tis as though
in the Great Desert a man would purposely mislead the merchant-guide;

1098. ’So "all flesh" having fallen into darkness, ignorant of where they are going, for their
sakes he would light the lamp of wisdom; say then! why would you extinguish it?

1099. ’All flesh engulphed and overwhelmed in the great sea of birth and death, this one prepares
the boat of wisdom; say then! why destroy and sink it?

1100. ’Patience is the sprouting of religion, firmness its root, good conduct is the flower,
the enlightened heart the boughs and branches,1101. ’Wisdom supreme the entire tree, the
"transcendent law" the fruit, its shade protects all living things; say then! why would you
cut it down?

1102. ’Lust, hate, and ignorance, (these are) the rack and bolt, the yoke placed on the shoulder
of the world; through ages long he has practised austerities to rescue men from these
their fetters,1103. ’He now shall certainly attain his end, sitting on this right-established
throne;

(seated) as all the previous Buddhas, firm and compact like a diamond;1104. ’Though all the
earth were moved and shaken, yet would this place be fixed and stable; him, thus fixed and
well assured, think not that you can overturn.

1105. ’Bring down and moderate your mind’s desire, banish these high and envious thoughts, prepare
yourselves for right reflection, be patient in your services.’

1106. Mâra hearing these sounds in space, and seeing Bodhisattva still unmoved, filled with
fear and banishing his high and supercilious thoughts, again took up his way to heaven above;

1107. Whilst all his host (were scattered), o’erwhelmed with grief and disappointment, fallen
from their high estate, ’reft of their warrior pride, their warlike weapons and accoutrements
thrown heedlessly and cast away ’mid woods and deserts.1108. Like as when some cruel
chieftain slain, the hateful band is all dispersed and scattered,

so the host of Mâra disconcerted, fled away. The mind of Bodhisattva (now reposed) peaceful
and quiet.1109. The morning sun-beams brighten with the dawn, the dust-like mist dispersing,
disappears;

the moon and stars pale their faint light, the barriers of the night are all removed,1110. Whilst
from above a fall of heavenly flowers pay their sweet tribute to the Bodhisattva.

No Chinese

VARGA 14. O-WEI-SAN-POU-TI (ABHISAMBODHI).

