938. ’Kapila the Rishi and his numerous followers, on this deep principle of "soul," practising
wisdom (Buddhi), found deliverance.939. ’Kapila and now Vâkaspati, by the power of "Buddhi"
perceiving the character of birth, old age, and death,

declare that on this is founded true philosophy;940. ’Whilst all opposed to this, they say,
is false.

"Ignorance" and "passion," causing constant "transmigration,"941. ’Abiding in the midst of these
(they say) is the lot of "all that lives."

Doubting the truth of "soul" is called "excessive doubt," and without distinguishing aright,
there can be no method of escape.942. ’Deep speculation as to the limits of perception is
but to involve the "soul;"

thus unbelief leads to confusion, and ends in differences of thought and conduct.943. ’Again,
the various speculations on "soul" (such as) "I say," "I know and perceive," "I come" and
"I go" or "I remain fixed," these are called the intricacies (windings) of "soul"’

944. ’And then the fancies raised in different natures, some saying "this is so," others denying
it, and this condition of uncertainty is called the state of "darkness."

945. ’Then there are those who say that outward things (resembling forms) are one with "soul,"
who say that the "objective" is the same as "mind," who confuse "intelligence" with "instruments,"
who say that "number" is the "soul."

946. ’Thus not distinguishing aright, these are called "excessive quibbles," "marks of folly,"
"nature changes," and so on.

947. ’To worship and recite religious books, to slaughter living things in sacrifice, to render
pure by fire and water, and thus awake the thought of final rescue,948. ’All these ways
of thinking are called "without right expedient,"

the result of ignorance and doubt, by means of word or thought or deed;949. ’Involving outward
relationships, this is called "depending on means;"

making the material world the ground of "soul," this is called "depending on the senses."950.
’By these eight sorts of speculation are we involved in birth and death.

The foolish masters of the world make their classifications in these five ways, (viz.)951. ’Darkness,
folly, and great folly, angry passion, with timid fear.

Indolent coldness is called "darkness;" birth and death are called "folly;"952. ’Lustful desire
is "great folly;" because of great men subjected to error, cherishing angry feelings,
"passion" results; trepidation of the heart is called "fear."

953. ’Thus these foolish men dilate upon the five desires; but the root of the great sorrow
of birth and death, the life destined to be spent in the five ways,

954. ’The cause of the whirl of life, I clearly perceive, is to be placed in the existence of
"I;" because of the influence of this cause, result the consequences of repeated birth and
death;

955. ’This cause is without any nature of its own, and its fruits have no nature; rightly considering
what has been said, there are four matters which have to do with escape,956. ’Kindling
wisdom--opposed to dark ignorance,--making manifest--opposed to concealment and obscurity,--

