if these four matters be understood, then we may escape birth, old age, and death.957. ’Birth,
old age, and death being over, then we attain a final place;

the Brahmans all depending on this principle,958. ’Practising themselves in a pure life, have
also largely dilated on it, for the good of the world.’

The prince hearing these words again enquired of Ârâda:959. ’Tell me what are the expedients
you name, and what is the final place to which they lead,

and what is the character of that pure (Brahman) life; and again what are the stated periods960.
’During which such life must be practised, and during which such life is lawful; all
these are principles to be enquired into; and on them I pray you discourse for my sake.’

961. Then that Ârâda, according to the Sûtras and Sâstras, spoke, ’Yourself using wisdom is
the expedient; but I will further dilate on this a little;

962. ’First by removing from the crowd and leading a hermit’s life, depending entirely on alms
for food, extensively practising rules of decorum, religiously adhering to right rules
of conduct,

963. ’Desiring little and knowing when to abstain, receiving whatever is given (in food), whether
pleasant or otherwise, delighting to practise a quiet (ascetic) life, diligently studying
all the Sûtras and Sâstras,

964. ’Observing the character of covetous longing and fear, without remnant of desire to live
in purity, to govern well the organs of life, the mind quieted and silently at rest,

965. ’Removing desire, and hating vice, all the sorrows of life (the world of desire) put away,
then there is happiness; and we obtain the enjoyment of the first dhyâna.

966. ’Having obtained this first dhyâna, then with the illumination thus obtained, by inward
meditation is born reliance on thought alone, and the entanglements of folly are put away;967.
’The mind depending on this, then after death, born in the Brahma heavens,

the enlightened are able to know themselves; by the use of means is produced further inward
illumination;968. ’Diligently persevering, seeking higher advance, accomplishing the second
dhyâna, tasting of that great joy, we are born in the Kwong-yin heaven (Abhâsvara);

969. ’Then by the use of means putting away this delight, practising the third dhyâna, resting
in such delight and wishing no further excellence, there is a birth in the Subhakritsna
(hin-tsing) heaven;

970. ’Leaving the thought of such delight, straightway we reach the fourth dhyâna, all joys
and sorrows done away, the thought of escape produced,

971. ’We dwell in this fourth dhyâna, and are born in the Vrihat-phala heaven; because of its
long enduring years, it is thus called Vrihat-phala (extensive-fruit);

972. ’Whilst in that state of abstraction rising (higher), perceiving there is a place beyond
any bodily condition, adding still and persevering further in practising wisdom, rejecting
this fourth dhyâna,973. ’Firmly resolved to persevere in the search, still contriving to
put away every desire after form,

gradually from every pore of the body there is perceived a feeling of empty release,974. ’And
in the end this extends to every solid part, so that the whole is perfected in an apprehension
of emptiness.

