In brief, perceiving no limits to. this emptiness, there is opened to the view boundless knowledge.975.
’Endowed with inward rest and peace, the idea of "I" departs, and the object of
"I:" clearly discriminating the non-existence of matter (bhava), this is the condition of
immaterial life.

976. ’As the Muñga (grass) when freed from its horny case, or as the wild bird which escapes
from its prison trap, so, getting away from all material limitations, we thus find perfect
release.

977. Thus ascending above the Brahmans (Brahmalokas?), deprived of every vestige of bodily existence,
we still endure. Endued with wisdom! let it be known this is real and true deliverance.

978. You ask what are the expedients for obtaining this escape; even as I have before detailed,
those who have deep faith will learn.

979. ’The Rishis Gaigîshavya, Ganaka, Vriddha Parâsara, and other searchers after truth,980.
’All by the way I have explained, have reached true deliverance.’

The prince hearing these words, deeply pondering on the outline of these principles,981. And
reaching back to the influences produced by our former lives, again asked with further words:

’I have heard your very excellent system of wisdom, the principles very subtle and deep-reaching,982.
’From which I learn that because of not "letting go" (by knowledge as a cause),
we do not reach the end of the religious life;

but by understanding nature in its involutions, then, you say, we obtain deliverance;983. ’I
perceive this law of birth has also concealed in it another law as a germ;

you say that the "I" (i.e. "the soul," of Kapila) being rendered pure, forthwith there is true
deliverance;984. ’But if we encounter a union of cause and effect, then there is a return
to the trammels of birth;

just as the germ in the seed, when earth, fire, water, and wind985. ’Seem to have destroyed
in it the principle of life, meeting with favourable concomitant circumstances will yet revive,

without any evident cause, but because of desire; so those who have gained this supposed release,
(likewise)986. ’Keeping the idea of "I" and "living things," have in fact gained no
final deliverance;

in every condition, letting go the "three classes" and again reaching the three "excellent qualities,"987.
’Because of the eternal existence of soul, by the subtle influences of that,

(influences resulting from the past,) the heart lets go the idea of expedients,988. ’And obtains
an almost endless duration of years. This, you say, is true release;

you say "letting go the ground on which the idea of soul rests," that this frees us from "limited
existence,"989. ’And that the mass of people have not yet removed the idea of soul,
(and are therefore still in bondage). But what is this letting go "gunas" (cords fettering
the soul); if one is fettered by these "gunas," how can there be release?

990. ’For gunî (the object) and "guna" (the quality) in idea are different, but in substance
one; if you say that you can remove the properties of a thing (and leave the thing) by arguing
it to the end, this is not so.991. ’If you remove heat from fire, then there is no such
thing as fire,

or if you remove surface (front) from body, what body can remain?992. ’Thus "guna" is as it
were surface, remove this and there can be no "gunî." So that this deliverance, spoken of
before, must leave a body yet in bonds.

993. ’Again, you say that by "clear knowledge" you get rid of body; there is then such a thing
as knowledge or the contrary; if you affirm the existence of clear knowledge, then there
should be some one who possesses it (i.e. possesses this knowledge);994. ’If there be a
possessor, how can there be deliverance (from this personal "I")?

