1065. And others thin and skinny, bellyless; others long-legged, mighty-knee’d; others big-shanked
and fat-calved; some with long and claw-like nails;

1066. Some were headless, breastless, faceless; some with two feet and many bodies; some with
big faces looking every way; some pale and ashy-coloured,

1067. Others colour’d like the bright star rising, others steaming fiery vapour, some with ears
like elephants, with humps like mountains, some with naked forms covered with hair,

1068. Some with leather skins for clothing, their faces party-coloured, crimson and white; some
with tiger skins as robes, some with snake skins over them,1069. Some with tinkling bells
around their waists, others with twisted screw-like hair, others with hair dishevelled
covering the body, some breath-suckers,

1070. Others body-snatchers, some dancing and shrieking awhile, some jumping onwards with their
feet together, some striking one another as they went,

1071. Others waving (wheeling round) in the air, others flying and leaping between the trees,
others howling, or hooting, or screaming, or whining, with their evil noises shaking the
great earth;

1072. Thus this wicked goblin troop encircled on its four sides the Bodhi tree; some bent on
tearing his body to pieces, others on devouring it whole;

1073. From the four sides flames belched forth, and fiery steam ascended up to heaven; tempestuous
winds arose on every side; the mountain forests shook and quaked;

1074. Wind, fire, and steam, with dust combined, (produced) a pitchy darkness, rendering all
invisible. And now the Devas well affected to the law, and all the Nâgas and the spirits
(kwei-shin),1075. All incensed at this host of Mâra, with anger fired, wept tears of blood;

the great company of Suddhavâsa gods, beholding Mâra tempting Bodhisattva,1076. Free from low-feeling,
with hearts undisturbed by passion, moved by pity towards him and commiseration,

came in a body to behold the Bodhisattva, so calmly seated and so undisturbed,1077. Surrounded
with an uncounted host of devils, shaking the heaven and earth with sounds ill-omened.

Bodhisattva silent and quiet in the midst remained, his countenance as bright as heretofore,
unchanged;1078. Like the great lion-king placed amongst all the beasts howling and growling
round him (so he sat),

a sight unseen before, so strange and wonderful!1079. The host of Mâra hastening, as arranged,
each one exerting his utmost force,

taking each other’s place in turns, threatening every moment to destroy him,1080. Fiercely staring,
grinning with their teeth, flying tumultuously, bounding here and there;

but Bodhisattva, silently beholding them, (watched them) as one would watch the games of children;1081.
And now the demon host waxed fiercer and more angry, and added force to force,

in further conflict; grasping at stones they could not lift, or lifting them, they could not
let them go;1082. Their flying spears, lances, and javelins, stuck fast in space, refusing
to descend;

