1013. The way opposed to this of ’withered body.’ I should therefore rather seek strength of
body, by drink and food refresh my members, and with contentment cause my mind to rest.

1014. My mind at rest, I shall enjoy silent composure; composure is the trap for getting ecstasy
(dhyâna); whilst in ecstasy perceiving the true law (right law, i.e. truth), then the
force of truth (the law) obtained, disentanglement will follow.

1015. And thus composed, enjoying perfect quiet, old age and death are put away; and then defilement
is escaped by this first means; thus then by equal steps the excellent law results
from life restored by food and drink.

1016. Having carefully considered this principle, bathing in the Nairañgana river, he desired
afterwards to leave the water (pool), but owing to extreme exhaustion was unable to rise;1017.
Then a heavenly spirit holding out (pressing down) a branch, taking this in his hand
he (raised himself and) came forth.

At this time on the opposite side of the grove there was a certain chief herdsman,1018. Whose
eldest daughter was called Nandâ. One of the Suddhavâsa Devas addressing her said, ’Bodhisattva
dwells in the grove, go you then, and present to him a religious offering.’

1019. Nandâ Balada (or Balaga or Baladhya) with joy came to the spot, above her hands (i.e.
on her wrists) white chalcedony bracelets, her clothing of a grey (bluish) colour (dye);1020.
The grey and the white together contrasted in the light, as the colours of the rounded
river bubble;

with simple heart and quicken’d step she came, and, bowing down at Bodhisattva’s feet,1021.
She reverently offered him perfumed rice milk, begging him of his condescension to accept
it.

Bodhisattva taking it, partook of it (at once), whilst she received, even then, the fruits of
her religious act.1022. Having eaten it, all his members refreshed, he became capable of
receiving Bodhi;

his body and limbs glistening with (renewed strength), and his energies swelling higher still,1023.
As the hundred streams swell the sea, or the first quarter’d moon daily increases
in brightness.

The five Bhikshus having witnessed this, perturbed, were filled with suspicious reflection;1024.
They supposed (said) that his religious zeal (heart) was flagging, and that he was leaving
and looking for a better abode, as though he had obtained deliverance, the five elements
entirely removed.

1025. Bodhisattva wandered on alone, directing his course to that ’fortunate’ tree, beneath
whose shade he might accomplish his search after complete enlightenment.1026. (Over) the ground
wide and level, producing soft and pliant grass,

easily he advanced with lion step, pace by pace, (whilst) the earth shook withal;1027. And as
it shook, Kâla nâga aroused, was filled with joy, as his eyes were opened to the light.

Forthwith he exclaimed: ’When formerly I saw the Buddhas of old, there was the sign of an earthquake
as now;1028. ’The virtues of a Muni are so great in majesty, that the great earth
cannot endure them;as step by step his foot treads upon the ground, so is there heard the
sound of the rumbling earth-shaking;1029. ’A brilliant light now illumes the world, as the
shining of the rising sun;

five hundred bluish tinted birds (I see), wheeling round to the right, flying through space;1030.
’A gentle, soft, and cooling breeze blows around in an agreeable way;

all these auspicious (miraculous) signs are the same as those of former Buddhas;1031. ’Wherefore
I know that this Bodhisattva will certainly arrive at perfect wisdom.And now, behold!
from yonder man, a grass cutter, he obtains some pure and pliant grass,1032. ’Which spreading
out beneath the tree, with upright body, there he takes his seat; his feet placed under
him, not carelessly arranged (moving to and fro), but like the firmly fixed and compact
body of a Nâga;

1033. ’Nor shall he rise again from off his seat till he has completed his undertaking.’ And
so he (the Nâga) uttered these words by way of confirmation. The heavenly Nâgas, filled with
joy,

