If you say there is no "knower," then who is it that is spoken of as "knowing?"995. ’If there
is knowledge and no person, then the subject of knowledge may be a stone or a log;

moreover, to have clear knowledge of these minute causes of contamination and reject them thoroughly,996.
’These being so rejected, there must be an end, then, of the "doer."

What Arâda has declared cannot satisfy my heart.997. ’This clear knowledge is not "universal
wisdom," I must go on and seek a better explanation.’ Going on then to the place of Udra
Rishi, he also expatiated on this question of ’I.’

998. (But) although he refined the matter to the utmost, laying down a term of ’thought’ and
’no thought’ taking the position of removing ’thought’ and ’no thought,’ yet even so he came
not out of the mire;

999. For supposing creatures attained that state, still (he said) there is a possibility of
returning to the coil, whilst Bodhisattva sought a method of getting out of it. So once more
leaving Udra Rishi,

1000. He went on in search of a better system, and came at last to Mount Kia-ke [the forest
of mortification], where was a town called Pain-suffering forest (Uravilva?). Here the five
Bhikshus had gone before.

1001. When then he beheld these five, virtuously keeping in check their senses (passion-members),
holding to the rules of moral conduct, practising mortification, dwelling in that grove
of mortification;

1002. Occupying a spot beside the Nairañgana river, perfectly composed and filled with contentment,
Bodhisattva forthwith by them (selecting) one spot, quietly gave himself to thought.

1003. The five Bhikshus knowing him with earnest heart to be seeking escape, offered him their
services with devotion, as if reverencing Îsvara Deva.

1004. Having finished their attentions and dutiful services, then going on he took his seat
not far off, as one about to enter on a course of religious practice, composing all his members
as he desired.

1005. Bodhisattva diligently applied himself to ’means,’ as one about to cross over old age,
disease, and death. With full purpose of heart (he set himself) to endure mortification,
to restrain every bodily passion, and give up thought about sustenance,

1006. With purity of heart to observe the fast-rules, which no worldly man (active man) can
bear; silent and still, lost in thoughtful meditation; and so for six years he continued,

1007. Each day eating one hemp grain, his bodily form shrunken and attenuated, seeking how to
cross (the sea) of birth and death, exercising himself still deeper and advancing further;

1008. Making his way perfect by the disentanglements of true wisdom, not eating, and yet not
(looking to that as) a cause (of emancipation), his four members although exceedingly weak,
his heart of wisdom increasing yet more and more in light;

1009. His spirit free, his body light and refined, his name spreading far and wide, as ’highly
gifted,’ even as the moon when first produced, or as the Kumuda flower spreading out its
sweetness;1010. Everywhere thro’ the country his excellent fame extended; the daughters
of the lord of the place both coming to see him,

his mortified body like a withered branch, just completing the period of six years,1011. Fearing
the sorrow of birth and death, seeking earnestly the method (cause) of true wisdom,

he came to the conviction that these were not the means to extinguish desire and produce ecstatic
contemplation;1012. Nor yet (the means by which) in former time, seated underneath the
Gambu tree, he arrived at that miraculous condition, that surely was the proper way, (he
thought),

