1111. Bodhisattva having subdued Mâra, his firmly fixed mind at rest, thoroughly exhausting
the first principle of truth, he entered into deep and subtle contemplation,

1112. Self-contained. Every kind of Sâmadhi in order passed before his eyes. During the first
watch he entered on ’right perception,’ and in recollection all former births passed before
his eyes;

1113. Born in such a place, of such a name, and downwards to his present birth, so through hundreds,
thousands, myriads, all his births and deaths he knew;

1114. Countless in number were they, of every kind and sort; then knowing, too, his family relationships,
great pity rose within his heart.

1115. This sense of deep compassion passed, he once again considered ’all that lives,’ and how
they moved within the six portions of life’s revolution, no final term to birth and death;

1116. Hollow all, and false and transient (unfixed) as the plantain tree, or as a dream, or
phantasy. Then in the middle watch of night, he reached to knowledge (eyes) of the pure Devas,

1117. And beheld before him every creature, as one sees images upon a mirror;

all creatures born and born again to die, noble and mean, the poor and rich,

1118. Reaping the fruit of right or evil doing, and sharing happiness or misery in consequence.

First he considered and distinguished evil-doers (works), that such must ever reap an evil birth;1119.
Then he considered those who practise righteous deeds, that these must gain a place
with men or gods;

but those again born in the nether hells, (he saw) participating in every kind of misery;

1120. Swallowing (drinking) molten brass (metal), the iron skewers piercing their bodies,

confined within the boiling caldron, driven and made to enter the fiery oven (dwelling),

1121. Food for hungry, long-toothed dogs, or preyed upon by brain-devouring birds;

dismayed by fire, then (they wander through) thick woods, with leaves like razors gashing their
limbs,

1122. While knives divide their (writhing) bodies, or hatchets lop their members, bit by bit;

drinking the bitterest poisons, their fate yet holds them back from death.1123. Thus those who
found their joy in evil deeds, he saw receiving now their direst sorrow;

a momentary taste of pleasure here, a dreary length of suffering there;1124. A laugh or joke
because of others’ pain, a crying out and weeping now at punishment received.

Surely if living creatures saw the consequence of all their evils deeds, self-visited,1125.
With hatred would they turn and leave them, fearing the ruin following--the blood and death.

He saw, moreover, all the fruits of birth as beasts, each deed entailing its own return,1126.
(And) when death ensues born in some other form (beast shape), different in kind according
to the deeds.

